

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en.html
© SIP
Top articles
Gault&Millau Luxembourg 2026: the best chefs, restaurants and bars
The Gault&Millau guide selects the best restaurants and brasseries, H!P locations, unmissable bars and the crème de la crème of Luxembourg's chocolatiers. Discover the 2026 winners and the latest additions to the guide dedicated to Luxembourg!
Nature for all: comfort hiking trails
Luxembourg is making its nature trails more inclusive by creating comfort hiking routes. Located in Bissen, Remich, Echternach, Grevenmacher and Redange-sur-Attert, they offer outdoor activities for all.
Luxembourg's top running races
Are you looking for a way to keep fit while visiting the length and breadth of Luxembourg? Here is a small selection of organised running events – a great option for keeping active all year round while taking in some of the country's memorable sights!
Theatre production - a varied programme of international quality
When it comes to theatre in Luxembourg, one could easily argue that there is something for everyone. Ranging from amateur theatre to prestigious internationally renowned professional drama groups, Luxembourg - despite its small size - boasts an eclectic programme that competes on an even footing with major international centres of performing arts.
Women of Luxembourg: voices, journeys, visions
Every year on 8th March, International Women's Day provides a special opportunity to pay tribute to those who, through their talent, courage or vision, have transformed and continue to transform our society. This day invites us to revisit the essential struggles fought by women throughout history, to celebrate their achievements of yesterday and today, but also to encourage those who are already shaping the future. This is a highlight that is in line with Luxembourg's commitments throughout the year.
On this occasion, we are offering a series of articles and interviews dedicated to remarkable women — some from Luxembourg, others from elsewhere but who have chosen Luxembourg as the place to develop their lives, careers or passions. Their backgrounds are diverse, their voices unique, their contributions essential.
Discover and celebrate the women who have shaped Luxembourg's past, who are shaping its present and who are imagining its future.
Spring is in the air
Feel the springfulness! It's the perfect time to immerse yourself in nature and experience the renewal of the forests, the multicoloured flowering of plants, the awakening of hibernating animals and the return of migratory species. Cities are also blossoming, and the spring sunshine invites you to explore them on foot or by bike. Across the country, whatever your age fitness level, green spaces and outdoor activities await you.
Minett
In the south of Luxembourg, known as the Red Lands or the Minett, the region owes its name to the reddish color of its soil, linked to the presence of iron ore that dominates the landscape. It is an area deeply shaped by its rich steelmaking past.
Even today, many remnants remain visible in the landscape, turning the territory into a true open-air museum where nature has gradually reclaimed its rights. Former industrial wastelands have found new life as cultural spaces, urban neighborhoods, and educational sites.
As part of this dynamic renewal, the Minett has quite literally transformed from red land into a true land of science, becoming a major hub of innovation and research. Thanks to its varied landscape, the south also offers numerous opportunities for outdoor leisure activities. Popular festivals, music and art festivals, concerts, and exhibitions all contribute to the vibrant cultural life of the region.
Faces of Luxembourg
Episode #26: Pascale Seil - glassblower and artist
Faces of Luxembourg #26 - Pascale Seil (Video/Audio YouTube)
What if nature wasn't just a backdrop… but also a source of your art? In our new Faces of Luxembourg episode, we meet Pascale Seil, a glassblower and artist. Working from her workshop in the UNESCO Global Geopark Mullerthal, Pascale draws her inspiration from Luxembourg's nature: its colours, textures, and the way it changes with the seasons. And in her glass, you can see it all reflected.
Episode #25: Dominique Santana - researcher and director
Faces of Luxembourg #25: Dominique Santana (Video/Audio YouTube)
What if history wasn't something you just read about… but something you could experience? In our new Face of Luxembourg episode, we meet Dominique Santana, researcher and director. Born in Luxembourg with Brazilian roots, she is fascinated by stories that connect us across space and time. Her work integrates film, digital tools, and transmedia storytelling to create media ecosystems that allow people to experience history in new ways. What motivates her? Making history more inclusive and giving space to voices that are often overlooked.
Top5: Luxembourg in brief
Tourist gems, historical highlights or unusual stories - our Top 5 articles rank month by month among the most coveted by our readers. Here they are, arranged for your enjoyment.
Last update27.03.2026
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture.html
Society and culture
Population
The Grand Duke and Grand Duchess Foundation: There when no one else is
3 October 2025 will mark the accession to the throne of the new Grand Ducal couple, a historic milestone for Luxembourg. ​ On this occasion, a new foundation was established. ​ 3 October 2025 will mark the accession to the throne of the new Grand Ducal couple, a historic milestone for Luxembourg. ​ On this occasion, a new foundation was established. ​
Top 5: surprising key figures about Luxembourg
1952 Luxembourg athlete Josy Barthel wins the only gold medal on the Olympiad. 2003, the artist Su-Mei Tse receives the first Golden Lion at the Venice Biennale and 20 Luxembourg crémants are decorated with gold in 2020. More amazing figures here!
Top 5: world famous Luxembourgers
The Grand Duchy is promoted through various channels. But above all, it is the Luxembourgers who represent their country at home and, above all, around the world. Discover five internationally successful people here!
Luxembourg’s music associations – where the community is in time.
Read the storyThe conductor raises his baton and the musicians in the hall bring their wind instruments to their lips, and moments later, fill the room with sound. This scene plays out weekly when the fanfares, music groups and 'harmonies'...
Thriving through migration
Read the storyDid you know that 47.4% of Luxembourg's population have a foreign nationality? While Luxembourg undoubtedly has one of the highest ratios of foreign nationals, it is also true that we do not only manage to integrate people from...
Genealogy – find your Luxembourgish ancestors
Read the storyWould you like to explore your descendance and understand your family history? In Luxembourg, genealogical research is facilitated by a large number of archives and even electronic sources compiling recent and historical documents on the population in the... Read the storyWould you like to explore your descendance and understand your family history? In Luxembourg, genealogical research is facilitated by a large number of archives and even electronic sources compiling recent and historical documents on the population in the...
7 things you need to know when you're invited for dinner in Luxembourg
Knowing your cultural code basics is key for a successful social evening in Luxembourg. Here are our top 7 things to do (or not to do) when you are having dinner in Luxembourg.
The Grand Duke and Grand Duchess Foundation - supporting inclusion and integration
The Fondation du Grand-Duc et de la Grande-Duchesse was set up in 1981, when the royal couple got married. Its focus has always been to encourage integration and inclusion.
An open and cosmopolitan society
Today, Luxembourg has a population of 634,000 people with an incredible diversity. In fact, almost 50% of the population doesn't have Luxembourgish nationality! Here's some facts and figures abour our population.
History
Top 5: museums for understanding our shared history
Luxembourg has been heavily influenced by the events of its past, and its turbulent history is reflected in the many museums that chronicle these far-reaching moments. Here are a few places where you can discover more. Luxembourg has been heavily influenced by the events of its past, and its turbulent history is reflected in the many museums that chronicle these far-reaching moments. Here are a few places where you can discover more.
Luxembourg: fertile ground for archaeological discoveries
From the Celts to the Romans and the Franks – and not forgetting the dinosaurs –, the land that now constitutes Luxembourg had multiple occupants before the modern country emerged. And they often left fascinating traces behind them. Find out more here. From the Celts to the Romans and the Franks – and not forgetting the dinosaurs –, the land that now constitutes Luxembourg had multiple occupants before the modern country emerged. And they often left fascinating traces behind them. Find out more here.
Tribute to those who will never be forgotten
Every year, Luxembourg pays tribute to those who suffered during the Second World War through various commemorative days.  Ceremonies are taking place across the country.
Luxembourgers who went Olympic
Luxembourg's Olympic legacy, now spanning over a century, holds the tales of many Luxembourgish athletes striving for a medal. Here, we highlight six of these athletes who left a mark on national Olympic history.
Gëlle Fra - a hallmark of society and Luxembourgish history
She was born in 1923 from a citizens' initiative to commemorate the soldiers who fell in the First World War. Her 100th anniversary is an opportunity to discover the emotional and controversial life of this golden woman! She was born in 1923 from a citizens' initiative to commemorate the soldiers who fell in the First World War. Her 100th anniversary is an opportunity to discover the emotional and controversial life of this golden woman!
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (II)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space. To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space.
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space. To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space.
Top 5: agreements that have shaped Luxembourg's history
Top 5: we take a look at the key moments in Luxembourg's history through five agreements that have marked our past, define our present and point to our future.
Top 5: Historic dates in Luxembourg that you need to know
Let us take you on a journey through 1,000 years of eventful European history.
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
On the occasion of International Women's Day, a portrait of eight Luxembourg women pioneers who have set milestones in a wide range of fields, from entrepreneurship and education to politics, gastronomy and art. On the occasion of International Women's Day, a portrait of eight Luxembourg women pioneers who have set milestones in a wide range of fields, from entrepreneurship and education to politics, gastronomy and art.
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Today we will introduce you to five famous people who stayed in Luxembourg. Among them is the German poet and novelist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who made several visits to the Grand Duchy.
Battle of the Bulge: War rears its ugly head one last time in Luxembourg
On 16 December, 1944, German troops advanced on Luxembourg and Belgium in a surprise attack, inflicting major losses on the US defenders in the Ardennes and laying wast to Luxembourg's northern regions. On 16 December, 1944, German troops advanced on Luxembourg and Belgium in a surprise attack, inflicting major losses on the US defenders in the Ardennes and laying wast to Luxembourg's northern regions.
At the helm of the Holy Roman Empire
Read the articleFollowing a period of regional development, the Counts of Luxembourg were in a strong position within the Roman Empire. In 1308, Henry VII was elected Emperor of the Holy Empire, an honour borne by two other counts of...
The steel industry and Luxembourg
Between the mid-19th century and the late 20th century, the country's fate was intrinsically linked to the steel industry.  With its decline from 1975 onwards, the country's economy diversified and the 'Luxembourgish social model' was established.
Luxembourg's origins
Luxembourg traces its origins back to 963 with the "little castle" of Lucilinburhuc. Through strategic marriages, acquisitions, and conflicts, the county became a regional power by the 13th century.
400 years of foreign sovereigns
From the 15th to the 19th century, Luxembourg frequently changed rulers. It was ruled by the Habsburgs, then by revolutionary France, and eventually came under the Dutch king before gaining independence, gradually losing territories over time.
Openness to the world
Read the storyAt the end of World War II, Luxembourg abandoned its status of neutrality, which did not protect it against two invasions, and guaranteed a place for itself in the international communities formed after 1945. With an understanding that...
A country's renaissance
Read the storyThe period from the 16th to the 19th centuries is often seen as an era of foreign dominion. In contrast, the 1815 Vienna Congress is seen as contemporary Luxembourg's date of birth. However, the Grand Duchy was far...
The Second World War
Read the articleThe Second World War began for the Grand Duchy when German troops crossed the border on 10 May 1940. Subjected to an intense process of Germanisation as well as the deportation of its Jewish population and the forced...
First World War
Read the storyEuropean powers had granted Luxembourg the status of an independent and neutral state in 1867. When German troops invaded Luxembourg in 1914, it was in violation of this neutrality. At the end of the conflict, the country was...
Languages
Luxembourgish – a living language evolving through the ages
Everyone who lives or works in the Grand Duchy will encounter Luxembourgish on a daily basis, whether at home, in the workplace or online. What was once just a dialect is now a language in its own right – and the national language of a multilingual country. Everyone who lives or works in the Grand Duchy will encounter Luxembourgish on a daily basis, whether at home, in the workplace or online. What was once just a dialect is now a language in its own right – and the national language of a multilingual country.
Multilingualism as an opportunity for our society
The linguistic situation in Luxembourg is extremely rich. In fact, switching from one language to another is perfectly normal in everyday life. This richness sets Luxembourg apart and contributes to its success in many ways.
Introduction to Luxembourgish
Have you ever heard Luxembourgish? This charming language is widely spoken in the Luxembourg region. That's why we have provided some common words and expressions on this page, which you can learn easily and try out yourself in everyday life. Have you ever heard Luxembourgish? This charming language is widely spoken in the Luxembourg region. That's why we have provided some common words and expressions on this page, which you can learn easily and try out yourself in everyday life.
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Luxembourg is a resolutely multilingual environment: the majority of Luxembourgers speak four languages and the rate of foreign residents almost reaches 50% of the total population. The languages spoken vary according to the context.
Festival and Traditions
Top 5: Wine and grape festivals in Luxembourg for celebrating along the Moselle
Luxembourg's Moselle region is renowned for its rich winemaking tradition and the many festivals that celebrate the vine. Discover our pick of the top 5 wine and grape festivals – and experience the Moselle's joie de vivre up close. Luxembourg's Moselle region is renowned for its rich winemaking tradition and the many festivals that celebrate the vine. Discover our pick of the top 5 wine and grape festivals – and experience the Moselle's joie de vivre up close.
International Comics Festival in Contern
In July, the International Comics Festival takes place in Contern. Come meet your favourite authors and illustrators, browse for rarities, and enjoy great food and entertainment.
Top 5: Medieval festivals
Do you feel like stepping back in time to the era of troubadours and knights? Check out Luxembourg's best medieval festivals and prepare to experience the magic of a bygone age! Do you feel like stepping back in time to the era of troubadours and knights? Check out Luxembourg's best medieval festivals and prepare to experience the magic of a bygone age!
Fairs and the Hämmelsmarsch: Traditional celebrations against a musical backdrop
The funfairs and the Hämmelsmarsch are always crowd pullers. Every year, they gather Luxembourg's society in different places. Immerse yourself with us and learn more about the world of funfairs in the Grand Duchy.
The intangible cultural heritage in the spotlight: discover seven traditional treasures of Luxembourg
Preserved traditions: Luxembourg's intangible cultural heritage from dry-stone walling to Fléizen, folk dances to midwifery - a fascinating panorama of cultural diversity preserved over generations.
The Haupeschbléiser: The UNESCO-recognised hunting horn players of Luxembourg
The Haupeschbléiser are part of the UNESCO Intangible World Cultural Heritage. Since the 1970s, they have once again filled the air with the sounds of their hunting horns. But what is this musical art from the French royal court all about?
The carillon plays for everyone
Every day, between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m., the melodies of the carillon of Notre Dame Cathedral ring out through the narrow streets of Luxembourg's capital. Adapted to the season, the bells can sound around fifty different melodies.
New Year's Celebrations: join us!
On 31 December, as the year's last hours count down, Luxembourgers like to get together with their family and friends and celebrate.
Europe Day: let's celebrate the European Union together!
On 9th May, the European Union celebrates Europe Day. In Luxembourg, Europe Day was declared an official holiday in 2019, making Luxembourg the only country in which this is hitherto the case!
Dräikinneksdag: celebrating Epiphany with a cake
On 6th January, it's the Feast of the Epiphany. In Luxembourg, it is known as Dräikinneksdag. On this occasion, people in Luxembourg eat a Dräikinnekskuch, a traditional pastry with frangipane. But there is more to it - a little surprise is hidden inside.
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
The Easter bunny and the egg hunt - around Easter, Luxembourg is full of events and traditions that are well known in the world. But have you ever heard of the Jaudes or the Éimaischen? This is how Easter is celebrated in Luxembourg. The Easter bunny and the egg hunt - around Easter, Luxembourg is full of events and traditions that are well known in the world. But have you ever heard of the Jaudes or the Éimaischen? This is how Easter is celebrated in Luxembourg.
Our Lady of Fatima Pilgrimage: Honoring Heritage and Faith
This Ascension Thursday, about 20,000 faithful, mostly Portuguese, participate in the pilgrimage to the shrine on the heights of Wiltz. The origins of the shrine, however, go back to very dark times in Luxembourg's history.
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Every year on Whit Tuesday, the ancient abbey town of Echternach plays host to the dancing procession, or Sprangprëssessioun, which is included on UNESCO's list of intangible cultural heritage.
Christmas - a time of togetherness
The end-of-year festivities are always a time to review the past year and to revisit those who are dear to our hearts. Discover the Christmas traditions in Luxembourg to prepare for the festivities! The end-of-year festivities are always a time to review the past year and to revisit those who are dear to our hearts. Discover the Christmas traditions in Luxembourg to prepare for the festivities!
Meekranz and Labour Day: celebrating Spring and workers
Union gatherings on the occasion of Labour Day, BBQs together with family and friends – a lot is happening in Luxembourg on May 1st. However, it's also the traditions of the Meekranz and the Maitrank that are being celebrated on this occasion.
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
The Oktav, which is celebrated in honour of the Virgin Mary, is one of the main religious events of the year. For a fortnight in April or May, the faithful go on pilgrimage to the capital of Luxembourg.
Liichtmëssdag: the unique Customs of Luxembourg's Candlemas celebration
On 2nd February, the eve of St. Blaise’s day, children celebrate Liichtmëssdag (Candlemas). They go from door to door, bearing Liichtebengelcher or lanterns, singing in exchange for sweets and coins.  On 2nd February, the eve of St. Blaise’s day, children celebrate Liichtmëssdag (Candlemas). They go from door to door, bearing Liichtebengelcher or lanterns, singing in exchange for sweets and coins.
Geenzefest: Wiltz's colorful broom festival
Each Whit Monday, the city of Wiltz in the Ardennes region throbs for the Broom Festival. Geenzefest, the festival honours the broom, a bush with yellow flowers that grows abundantly in the region.
Fuesent: masked balls and cavalcades
Like our neighbours, Luxembourgers love to celebrate Carnival. Between Candlemas Day (Liichtmëssdag on 2nd February) and Ash Wednesday (Äschermëttwoch) Luxembourg lives the craziest season of the year.  Like our neighbours, Luxembourgers love to celebrate Carnival. Between Candlemas Day (Liichtmëssdag on 2nd February) and Ash Wednesday (Äschermëttwoch) Luxembourg lives the craziest season of the year.
Léiffrawëschdag: a unique harvest festival in Greiveldange
The Moselle village of Greiveldange is one of the last places to practice this tradition every 15 August. For the occasion, a bunch of herbs, cereals and vegetables is blessed in a ceremony, in the hope of a bountiful harvest.
Kleeschen: unwrapping the delightful customs of St. Nicholas Day
Each year on December 6th, children eagerly await the arrival of Kleeschen, who visits homes with gifts and treats. This festive occasion is marked by parades, community gatherings, and the sharing of stories that highlight generosity and kindness.
Bretzelsonndeg - a pretzel for love
On Bretzelsonndeg, or Pretzel Sunday, women are given this famous puff pastry with sugar icing and almonds as a token of love. But on leap years, the tradition changes. On Bretzelsonndeg, or Pretzel Sunday, women are given this famous puff pastry with sugar icing and almonds as a token of love. But on leap years, the tradition changes.
Celebrate National Day: Join the Festivities for the Grand Duke's Birthday in Luxembourg!
National Day is just around the corner! Every year, people come together to show their connection to the Grand Duchy and celebrate their home and its traditions. A perfect occasion for two days filled with festivities. Find your reasons to go here!
Buergbrennen - let's burn winter together
On  the first Sunday after Carnival,  the 'Buergen' (torches) are lit across the Grand Duchy to chase  away the winter. This traditional festival brings together crowds in all the country's municipalities.  On  the first Sunday after Carnival,  the 'Buergen' (torches) are lit across the Grand Duchy to chase  away the winter. This traditional festival brings together crowds in all the country's municipalities.
Schueberfouer – three weeks of funfair in summer
The Schueberfouer is the highlight of the Luxembourg summer. Between candy and rides, 2 million visitors have fun every year.
Allerhellegen and Trauliicht: Honour the dead and drive away evil spirits
When the nights become significantly longer, All Saints' Day is just around the corner. On this occasion and faithful to tradition, we commemorate our deceased and cultivate a custom found mainly in the north of the country: the Trauliicht.
Monarchy and intitutions
As one reign begins, another comes to an end
3 October marks a historic turning point: after 25 years on the throne, Grand Duke Henri abdicates and hands over the throne to his son Guillaume, who, by taking the oath of office, opens a new chapter in the country's history.
As one reign draws to a close, another begins
After 25 years on the throne, the Grand Duke will abdicate and hand over the crown to his son. On 3 October 2025, Crown Prince Guillaume will become the Grand Duke, marking a new era for Luxembourg, bringing together modernity and respect for tradition.
Mediation: navigating conflict and growing as a society
Mediation as a means to resolve conflicts without lengthy judicial procedures is becoming ever more popular, due to its empowering nature. Meet three key players on their mission in Luxembourg.
Citizen participation in democratic life to strengthen community life
Playing an active role in democratic life is a key part of living together in community. Voting, presenting petitions, being part of an association, participating in institutional initiatives... democracy must be learned and trained!
National anthem
La "Heemecht" est l’hymne national du Luxembourg. Plus qu’une simple chanson, il symbolise le Grand-Duché, l’identité de son peuple ainsi que son sentiment d’appartenance à une nation.
Tripartite: Luxembourg's social model
Read the storyLuxembourg's so-called 'tripartite' social model is based on an institutionalised and continuous trialogue between the government, employers and trade unions on important economic and social issues with a view to finding a consensus.History The 'Luxembourg model' was implemented...
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies, with its 60 members, reflects the will of the people in legislation. It ensures an open legislative process and engages citizens through petitions, guaranteeing direct access to decision-makers.
Justice
Read the storyThe Constitution and special acts of legislation lay down the foundations necessary to keep the judges free from all influence from the executive and legislative powers, but also to grant their independence from the citizens. Pursuant to the...
The symbols of the dynasty
Read the storyThe symbols of the national dynasty are:

the coat of arms of the Grand Duke of Luxembourg;
the Wilhelmus, the anthem of the grand ducal house; 
National Day is the public celebration of the Grand Duke's birthday on June 23.
The Council of State
Read the storyThe Council of State was instituted at the time of the constitutional revision of 27 November 1856. It is an independent institution that is called on for its opinion on all bills and proposals for new legislation and...
National symbols
Read the storyThe symbols which have been adopted by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg are of the utmost importance and value, for they represent and symbolise the identity of a people, their sovereignty, and above all their desire to '...
The electoral system
According to its constitution, Luxembourg is a parliamentary democracy in the form of a constitutional monarchy. The members of the Chambre des députés are elected every 5 years. At the municipal level, this is the case every 6 years.
The Grand Duke
Currently, Luxembourg is the only Grand Duchy in the world and the Grand Duke is its head of state. He embodies the independence and continuity of a state that was strongly influenced by the ups and downs of history.
The Government of Luxembourg
According to the constitution, the Grand Duke holds the executive power and assures the execution of the laws by taking the necessary regulations. In practice, however, this task is performed by the government.
International openness
Schengen: 40 years of European history on a ship
To mark the 40th anniversary of the signing of the Schengen Agreement, the Schengen Museum will be reopening and the fully renovated Prinzessin Marie-Astrid Europawill be unveiled. Come along to Schengen on 14 June 2025 for a historic day!
Luxembourg and UNESCO: a commitment to education, science, culture and communication
As the world becomes more interconnected, UNESCO's global efforts in education, science, culture, and communication are increasingly vital. Luxembourg remains dedicated to implementing these principles both domestically and internationally.
Belgians and Luxembourgers - the things we share.
Luxembourgers and Belgians share a deep and long-lasting friendship based on a common and intertwined history, shared family ties and a regular exchange on all levels. Discover some little-known secrets as to why both countries are so close to each other.
Portugal and Luxembourg – an unwavering partnership
A royal wedding was at the beginning of the special Portuguese-Luxembourgish relationship. Since then, both countries have been a safe haven for the other in times of need, creating a strong bond between the peoples of both nations.
Microfinance: small amounts, big impact.
Microfinance helps fragile people in emerging countries to have access to banking services. This commitment has earned Muktinath Bikas Bank Ltd, which operates in Nepal, the European Microfinance Award. Reactions of the assistant CEO of the bank. Microfinance helps fragile people in emerging countries to have access to banking services. This commitment has earned Muktinath Bikas Bank Ltd, which operates in Nepal, the European Microfinance Award. Reactions of the assistant CEO of the bank.
European Microfinance Award: together for financial inclusion and sustainable development
Food security in uncertain times: This year's microfinance award goes to Yikri, a microfinance institution based in Burkina Faso. Read about what sets this initiative apart and why Luxembourg plays a key role in microfinance.
The Luxembourg Presidents of the European Commission
Read the storyThe European Commission is the executive body of the European Union. As such, the Commission in particular proposes new legislation, draws up the budget, ensures compliance with European law and represents the EU externally. It consists of one...
Benelux Union
Read the storyThe Benelux Union is an intergovernmental cooperation agreement that was established in 1944. The acronym 'Benelux' incorporates the names of the three participating countries (Belgium, The Netherlands, Luxembourg). This tripartite union, which can be seen as the forerunner...
Luxembourg and the Greater Region
Read the storyThe Greater Region is located in the heart of Europe, on the road and railroad axis that links the Mediterranean region to the North Sea. Its 11.6 million inhabitants, spread over an area of 65,401 sq.km. (about the... Read the storyThe Greater Region is located in the heart of Europe, on the road and railroad axis that links the Mediterranean region to the North Sea. Its 11.6 million inhabitants, spread over an area of 65,401 sq.km. (about the...
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
With 1% of the country's gross national income (GNI) invested in it, development aid is a matter of great importance to the Grand Duchy. The Grand Duchy carries out a wide range of bi- and multilateral projects in many countries, all over the world. Key projects are being carried out in Burkina Faso, Laos and Nicaragua, for example.
Robert Schuman and the beginnings of the European Union
In the 1950s, the French Foreign Minister and son of Luxembourg City, Robert Schuman, proposed founding the European Coal and Steel Community, the nucleus of the European Union.
Humanitarian aid and emergency.lu
The emergency.lu rapid deployment mobile satellite telecommunications platform is one of the flagship projects of the Luxembourg Cooperation.
Luxembourg, home of European institutions
Luxembourg City, home to European institutions since 1952, is one of the three institutional seats of the European Union. Located in the heart of Western Europe, the country offers the advantages of its multilingualism, quality of life and ease of access. Luxembourg City, home to European institutions since 1952, is one of the three institutional seats of the European Union. Located in the heart of Western Europe, the country offers the advantages of its multilingualism, quality of life and ease of access.
Objectives and strategy of Luxembourg's cooperation
Read the storyLuxembourg's cooperation pursues the main objective to reduce and, in the long run, completely eradicate extreme poverty by supporting sustainable development in economic, social and environmental terms. A new general strategy While the number of people living in...
The Schengen Agreements – dreaming a Europe without borders
Schengen is a small village on the Luxembourg Moselle, located on the Luxembourg-France-Germany tri-border area. For most people however, it is a symbol of the free movement of people and goods and the suppression of borders in Europe.
Artistic creation
Luxembourg at the Eurovision Song Contest
The Eurovision Song Contest (ESC) brings together nations from across Europe and beyond every year, celebrating their community spirit, openness and diversity. Did you know that Luxembourg has been part of the ESC since its beginnings in 1956? The Eurovision Song Contest (ESC) brings together nations from across Europe and beyond every year, celebrating their community spirit, openness and diversity. Did you know that Luxembourg has been part of the ESC since its beginnings in 1956?
Prix maître d'ouvrage 2024
301 private and public contracting parties from Luxembourg took part in the 2024 edition of the Bauhärepräis OAI. Discover the know-how and architectural works which showcase building culture and the quality of our community life.
Top 5: artistic creations and initiatives that have left their mark on contemporary art in Luxembourg
Art can arouse a wide range of emotions and interpretations. Here are five works that have provoked debate, but also bear witness to openness to criticism and artistic freedom - essential principles of creativity in Luxembourg. Art can arouse a wide range of emotions and interpretations. Here are five works that have provoked debate, but also bear witness to openness to criticism and artistic freedom - essential principles of creativity in Luxembourg.
Third places and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (II)
The rehabilitation of wasteland into creative projects will enhance the heritage for both the region and the population. In this article we present the National Centre for Industrial Culture, which works to preserve and enhance this heritage.
Luxembourg at the Venice Biennale
Since 1988, Luxembourg has regularly participated in the Biennale di Venezia. In 2003, the Grand Duchy even won the Golden Lion! Join us in retracing the history of this Venetian adventure with the help of some of the art projects that have impressed us.
Andrea Mancini and the design collective Every Island exhibit at the Venice Biennale
Since 1988, Luxembourg has regularly participated in La Biennale di Venezia. Visit with us the current exhibition "A Comparative Dialogue Act" by Andrea Mancini and Every Island at the Luxembourg pavilion.
Lëtzebuerger Filmpräis
The 11th edition of the Lëtzebuerger Filmpräis took place on 22 November 2025. During the ceremony prizes in 14 categories were awarded. Curtain up on the winners!
From graffiti to street art in Luxembourg
In the 1980s and 1990s the first graffiti appeared in Luxembourg. Seen at the time as an act of rebellion, under the influence of the hip-hop scene, this "urban art" is democratised today. See for yourself!
Architecture competitions
Rigorous construction standards in perfect harmony with the landscape, preserving the heritage, playing a social role and promoting energy efficiency... these are just some of the criteria taken into consideration as part of the architecture competitions and awards. Find out more about Luxembourg's award winners here!
Top 5: iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction
This time around, our Top 5 series casts a light on five iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction. Comic books, detective novels and series, 2D and 3D animation and fables for children offer ideal opportunities to uncover the spirit of Luxembourg.
Hip-hop in Luxembourg
Hip-hop definitely found its place in Luxembourg's urban culture from the early 90s. We decided to take a look back at its history and compile a playlist of local hip (hop) artists for you!
Jazz in Luxembourg (I)
The history of jazz in Luxembourg is a long process. Imported by American soldiers, jazz quickly found its place in the Grand Duchy. Let's go and meet some of the talents who made jazz emerge in Luxembourg.
Jazz in Luxembourg (II)
The history of jazz in Luxembourg is a long process. Imported by American soldiers, jazz quickly found its place in the Grand Duchy. Let's go and meet some of the talents who made jazz emerge in Luxembourg.
Jazz in Luxembourg (III)
The history of jazz in Luxembourg is a long process. Imported by American soldiers, jazz quickly found its place in the Grand Duchy. Let's go and meet some of the talents who made jazz emerge in Luxembourg.
Musical production
Gold, Diamond and Platinum Awards, international and national success stories – read more about the music production in Luxembourg and where to gain a first experience yourself!  Gold, Diamond and Platinum Awards, international and national success stories – read more about the music production in Luxembourg and where to gain a first experience yourself!
Anne-Marie Reuter wins the Servais prize
The Servais prize is one of the country’s most prestigious literary accolades. It is awarded to works published in the previous year in Luxembourg. In 2025, the literary prize was awarded to Anne-Marie Reuter for her first novel "M for Amnesia". The Servais prize is one of the country’s most prestigious literary accolades. It is awarded to works published in the previous year in Luxembourg. In 2025, the literary prize was awarded to Anne-Marie Reuter for her first novel "M for Amnesia".
Luxembourg City Film Festival
In the framework of the 2026 edition, which runs from 5th to 15th March, Artistic Director Alexis Juncosa tells us how the festival has developed and speaks about the ambitions and opportunities that are shaping its future. In the framework of the 2026 edition, which runs from 5th to 15th March, Artistic Director Alexis Juncosa tells us how the festival has developed and speaks about the ambitions and opportunities that are shaping its future.
Art and craft trades
The biennial "De Mains de Maîtres" wishes to give more visibility to the artistic professions in Luxembourg and to encourage new generations to follow this creative path, like the eclectic designer Lea Schroeder. The biennial "De Mains de Maîtres" wishes to give more visibility to the artistic professions in Luxembourg and to encourage new generations to follow this creative path, like the eclectic designer Lea Schroeder.
National Literary Competition: Jhemp Hoscheit back on top
Jhemp Hoscheit has won the 2025 National Literary Competition for his novel "Den Impakt vu Klappentexter", a book which explores the themes of loss and death.
Luxembourgish film actors
Luxembourgish cinema has undergone significant developments since the 1980's, alongside national actresses and actors working in the film industry.
The top 10 of Luxembourg international cinema
A cinematographic journey through a dozen internationally successful Luxembourg films. A cinematographic journey through a dozen internationally successful Luxembourg films.
World War II in Luxembourgish films
The crimes committed by Nazi Germany cannot be erased or forgotten. The traces of these crimes are taken up again through the Luxembourg film, whether fiction or documentary.
10 Luxembourgish movies to watch
The Luxembourg film industry has a long history. The first film shot in the country was made by the Lumière brothers in 1899. Before the First World War and from the 1920s onwards, various filmmakers and cinema enthusiasts made short...
Film Fund Luxembourg
The Luxembourg film sector has been attracting audiences to cinemas for decades. This success is largely due to the commitment of the Luxembourg Film Fund.
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Specific urban needs and an ever-renewing society are features of the architecture scene in the Grand Duchy. Architects are focusing on clever solutions to deal with one of the most pressing questions: how do we want to live in the future? Their answer: quality of life, sustainable construction, and bespoke design are to come first!
Dance in Luxembourg
In Luxembourg, people are very passionate about dance. Audiences and creators have been subject to constant change for some time now. The dance programmes in theatres and cultural centres offer national creations as well as international shows.
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
Luxembourg's artistic landscape has gone through a period of rapid changes in the past decades. The creative future remains open-ended and contemporary art makes news headlines!
Theatre production - a varied programme of international quality
When it comes to theatre in Luxembourg, one could easily argue that there is something for everyone. Ranging from amateur theatre to prestigious internationally renowned professional drama groups, Luxembourg - despite its small size - boasts an eclectic programme that competes on an even footing with major international centres of performing arts.
Multilingual literature
Multilingualism is the strength of Luxembourgers, as their literature also reveals. Luxembourgish, French, German, Italian, English - Luxembourg's literature speaks many languages, just like its authors.
Classical music for you to enjoy
Many musicians and singers play a diversified repertoire of classical music in Luxembourg. Enjoy a varied programme featuring internationally acclaimed artists.
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Contemporary Luxembourgish literature is highly creative. Although literature in Luxembourgish is not a long-standing tradition, many Luxembourgish writers write in their mother tongue. Read more about it here!
Rock, Pop, et cetera - popular music genres
Lisez l'articleMany artists that are famous beyond the borders come from the Grand Duchy, such as Seed to Tree, Edsun or Dream Catcher. These pop bands and singers perform on stage on many occasions throughout the year. The place(s) to...
Edward Steichen
With the Steichen Collections Luxembourg, the Grand Duchy has at its disposal a veritable treasure trove of photography linked to the long and rich career of Edward J. Steichen (1879-1973), which was marked above all by photography.
Culinary delights
Verwurrelter: the knotted treat for Carnival season
In Luxembourg, Verwurrelter are closely connected to Carnival and are the perfect way to top up your energy in the winter. With the recipe from the EHTL you can bake these knotted pastries without getting yourself in a knot! In Luxembourg, Verwurrelter are closely connected to Carnival and are the perfect way to top up your energy in the winter. With the recipe from the EHTL you can bake these knotted pastries without getting yourself in a knot!
Nonnefäscht: sweet treats for carnival
In Luxembourg, Nonnefäscht are an important carnival tradition. Try your hand at making these delicious buns using the EHTL recipe and enjoy them piping hot from the oven – while learning more about how they got their comical name. In Luxembourg, Nonnefäscht are an important carnival tradition. Try your hand at making these delicious buns using the EHTL recipe and enjoy them piping hot from the oven – while learning more about how they got their comical name.
Christmas stollen
With its fragrant candied fruit, buttery dough and soft marzipan centre, Stollen (or "Christstollen") is a Christmas classic that is also hugely popular in Luxembourg. We have prepared a delicious recipe for you to bake at home!
Stuffed Christmas capon: recipe by Anne Faber
For the festive season, we invite you to enjoy a Christmas classic: capon, by Anne Faber, with a delicious recipe that will delight your guests' taste buds.
The Christmas log
The log is a cake with which the Christmas or New Year's meal in Luxembourg comes to an end. The École d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg offers you two recipes to make your own: the classic and the vegan one!
Gromperekichelcher
Read the storyGromperekichelcher are one of Luxembourg’s most beloved specialties: this simple but tasty dish is eaten at popular festivals and fairs across the Grand Duchy. These potato patties are fried in oil, eaten warm and usually served with apple...
Boxemännchen
What can you find in Luxembourg during Advent? The famous Boxemännchen. These little brioche men are a sweet symbol of Saint Nicholas and delight both children and adults.
AOP – guaranteed good wines
The "Appellation d'origine protégée" (AOP) label guarantees the quality and origin of Luxembourg's Moselle wines. It ensures strict controls throughout the production process, offering consumers a unique taste of the region's winemaking expertise.
Crémant
Crémant de Luxembourg is a sparkling wine made from local grapes, renowned for its quality. Available in various styles, it’s perfect for celebrations or casual gatherings. Enjoy its effervescence chilled and discover the elegance of this exquisite wine.
Beers in Luxembourg
Read the storyWhether it's on a night out, for a relaxed evening at home or for a festive occasion – Luxembourgers love their beer! The country's beer brewing tradition goes back to at least the 1300s, and today this beverage...
Gastronomic heritage
Whether you are a chef, newlyweds or keen on local gastronomy, a cookbook by Ketty Thull is a "must". Clovis Degrave, Hostellerie du Grünewald, reinterpreted one of the dishes of this icon for us!
Maitrank
When the first rays of spring sunshine give the world a new splendour and bathe the woods in a delicate green, it is also time to savour a regional speciality: Maitrank.
Kniddelen
Luxembourgers have mastered the art to make a tasty dish for all seasons out of simple ingredients. Kniddelen, flour dumplings, are such a simple dish that is quickly whipped up using ingredients found in every kitchen. Luxembourgers have mastered the art to make a tasty dish for all seasons out of simple ingredients. Kniddelen, flour dumplings, are such a simple dish that is quickly whipped up using ingredients found in every kitchen.
Galette des rois - Dräikinnekskuch
A real treat for anyone with a sweet tooth, especially frangipane fans! For Epiphany (6 January), the people of Luxembourg love a slice of their Dräikinnekskuch ("Three Kings Cake"). But beware, there is a little surprise inside!
Cuisine? International.
Read the storyIn Luxembourg, the cultural diversity of the population, the country's central geographical position in Europe and the history of local cuisine all come together to create an environment conducive to culinary creation. From simple hearty cooking to haute...
Territory and climate
Apiculture Jungels (Jungels bee-keeping), the empire of bees
In the Luxembourg village of Brandenbourg, Victor Jungels raises over 15 million bees and continues a 35-year-old family tradition. His pure and local honey goes straight from the hive to the jar. Read on for an immersion into this buzzing world. In the Luxembourg village of Brandenbourg, Victor Jungels raises over 15 million bees and continues a 35-year-old family tradition. His pure and local honey goes straight from the hive to the jar. Read on for an immersion into this buzzing world.
Natura 2000: Luxembourg’s contribution to European nature conservation
Luxembourg boasts an impressive variety of unique landscapes and natural areas. To protect these and preserve them for future generations, the Grand Duchy is implementing conservation programmes, such as the Natura 2000 European protection network. Luxembourg boasts an impressive variety of unique landscapes and natural areas. To protect these and preserve them for future generations, the Grand Duchy is implementing conservation programmes, such as the Natura 2000 European protection network.
Top 5: Most picturesque rivers
Sail or walk along Luxembourg's rivers and discover some of the country's most beautiful landscapes. From north to south, each region is brimming with natural beauty and historical landmarks. Sail or walk along Luxembourg's rivers and discover some of the country's most beautiful landscapes. From north to south, each region is brimming with natural beauty and historical landmarks.
Forests in Luxembourg
The forests of the Grand Duchy and other regions are home to a wide range of animal and plant species.  In this article, we will take a closer look at the woodlands of Luxembourg and talk to Michel Dostert, an expert in forest management. The forests of the Grand Duchy and other regions are home to a wide range of animal and plant species.  In this article, we will take a closer look at the woodlands of Luxembourg and talk to Michel Dostert, an expert in forest management.
Top 5: Luxembourg twinned municipalities
Meeting different people, making friends and learning about other cultures - that's what twinning is all about. More than 50 Luxembourg municipalities have joined forces with towns abroad. Here's a quick overview.
Top 5: Special villages worth visiting
Join us on a journey to the five most extraordinary villages of the Grand Duchy. Explore both well-known and lesser-known places – from tiny, hidden hamlets to sites of European history. Join us on a journey to the five most extraordinary villages of the Grand Duchy. Explore both well-known and lesser-known places – from tiny, hidden hamlets to sites of European history.
Luxembourg's territory
Read the storyLocated between Germany, Belgium and France, Luxembourg is one of the smallest countries in the world, covering a 2,586 km2 area. The country's territory is divided into two geographical regions: the Oesling up north and the Guttland in...
Sustainable development
Architecture of the Luxembourg Pavilion in Osaka: Circular and responsible
The design plan behind the Luxembourg Pavilion’s impressive structure reaches far beyond the Osaka 2025 Expo. The Grand Duchy is showcasing an architectural vision that is aesthetically pleasing, innovative and circular. An innovative project to be explored!
Top 5: environmentally friendly innovative projects
As part of the fight against climate change and its consequences on nature, eco-responsible commitments in Luxembourg have flourished. Let's take a closer look at a few good ideas.  As part of the fight against climate change and its consequences on nature, eco-responsible commitments in Luxembourg have flourished. Let's take a closer look at a few good ideas.
Clever fueren: a major boost for electric mobility
To encourage individuals to switch to more environmentally friendly vehicles, state financial support has been extended for a further 24 months. Here are the changes that await you.
Ethical shopping in Luxembourg
With ethical shopping, the caring consumer can contribute to the protection of human rights and the environment. Follow us on a journey of ethical food and clothes shopping in Luxembourg.
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Sustainable urban planning aims to rethink spatial planning to recreate a symbiosis between the urban environment and nature. In Luxembourg, urban planning strategy with positive impacts promotes environmentally friendly neighbourghoods.
Energy Efficiency
There are many ways to save energy. Read more about the energy performance certificate (CPE) and the "Klimabank an nohaltegt Wunnen" package, and discover the "Mamerhaff", a remarkable example of energy renovation!
Organic farming
The agricultural sector in Luxembourg is undergoing profound changes. Many farmers are ready to leave conventional agriculture in order to turn to local marketing that addresses customers directly. Interview.  The agricultural sector in Luxembourg is undergoing profound changes. Many farmers are ready to leave conventional agriculture in order to turn to local marketing that addresses customers directly. Interview.
Electric mobility gathers speed in Luxembourg
The electric car is gaining ground and Luxembourg is expanding its network of public ultra-fast charging stations, now also on motorway rest areas!
'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg': the waste prevention strategy
Luxembourg aims to significantly reduce the amount of waste produced nationwide. In this context, a roadmap has been drawn up to achieve this target. The strategy is based on the principle of the circular economy.
Sustainable wines in the making
Luxembourg wines and crémants enjoy an excellent reputation. However, the millennia-old tradition of winegrowing has undergone a transformation in terms of sustainability, organic viticulture and technical developments. Luxembourg wines and crémants enjoy an excellent reputation. However, the millennia-old tradition of winegrowing has undergone a transformation in terms of sustainability, organic viticulture and technical developments.
Gringgo: fair and ethical trade in Luxembourg
'Don't wait, act!' This is the motto of Gringgo, a cooperative in the canton of Redange that offers consumers and suppliers the opportunity to move towards fair trade.
Focus on renewable energies
Renewable energies are constantly gaining ground on the path to energy transition. In its plan to support the development of green energy 'Gréng relance fir Lëtzebuerg' Luxembourg is on track to achieve its objectives.
All-time high in solar energy in Luxembourg
The strong spring sunshine and the increase of the photovoltaic surface area in recent years have been key factors in reaching a historical peak of solar energy in Luxembourg in March and April 2020.
IBLA - the biological research institute
Read the storyThe Institute for Organic Agriculture and Agrarian Culture Luxembourg (Institut fir biologesch Landwirtschaft an Agrarkultur Lëtzebuerg, IBLA) is a research Institute dedicated to organic agriculture in Luxembourg. In 2019, the IBLA was awarded the Bio-Agrar-Präis. This is the...
Last update10.11.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living.html
Living
Family
Help for vulnerable families
The Luxembourg socio-economic model seeks to maintain social cohesion, promote integration and guarantee equal opportunities for all. In this context, a series of measures are available to support vulnerable households. The Luxembourg socio-economic model seeks to maintain social cohesion, promote integration and guarantee equal opportunities for all. In this context, a series of measures are available to support vulnerable households.
Marriages and partnerships
Getting married remains incredibly popular in Luxembourg, with nearly 2000 couples saying 'I do' each year. The country offers various types of partnerships, including marriage, which is by far the most favored, as well as the civil partnership PACS.
Types of parental leave
Quels sont les congés dont peuvent bénéficier les parents au Grand-Duché? Dans quelles circonstances et dans quelles conditions les congés sont-ils accordés? Voici un tour d’horizon des différents types de congés et de leurs modalités.
Family allowances
From parental leave to the childcare voucher for cross-border workers, you will find here a summary of family support in Luxembourg aimed at cultivating a balanced family life and creating equal opportunities for all children. From parental leave to the childcare voucher for cross-border workers, you will find here a summary of family support in Luxembourg aimed at cultivating a balanced family life and creating equal opportunities for all children.
Equal opportunities
Luxembourg is committed to an egalitarian society: combating stereotypes, equal pay, positive action and protection against domestic violence. Discover its key initiatives. Luxembourg is committed to an egalitarian society: combating stereotypes, equal pay, positive action and protection against domestic violence. Discover its key initiatives.
Education
Mondorf, first Luxembourg school in the Unesco network
25 years ago, Paul Sandt took the initiative to create the first Unesco school in Luxembourg. Today, the network has grown to include 16 schools across the country. 25 years ago, Paul Sandt took the initiative to create the first Unesco school in Luxembourg. Today, the network has grown to include 16 schools across the country.
Scouting in Luxembourg
Solidarity, tolerance and democracy are just some of the scouting values. We introduce you to the FNEL, its missions and how it contributes to the education of children and young people throughout the year. Solidarity, tolerance and democracy are just some of the scouting values. We introduce you to the FNEL, its missions and how it contributes to the education of children and young people throughout the year.
BEE SECURE: Supporting young people and helping parents with digital education
Bad online experiences emphasise the importance of online safety. BEE SECURE is committed to promoting a positive digital culture and raises awareness of the risks of the internet with a diverse programme, especially among young people. Bad online experiences emphasise the importance of online safety. BEE SECURE is committed to promoting a positive digital culture and raises awareness of the risks of the internet with a diverse programme, especially among young people.
Quality education for all
Ensuring the right to education and equal opportunities is a comprehensive school support programme in Luxembourg. In this article, we will present three of the many ongoing projects. Ensuring the right to education and equal opportunities is a comprehensive school support programme in Luxembourg. In this article, we will present three of the many ongoing projects.
Education in the 21st century (I)
In Luxembourg, a cosmopolitan country, it makes sense that the education system allows pupils to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. Researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes take up the challenge! In Luxembourg, a cosmopolitan country, it makes sense that the education system allows pupils to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. Researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes take up the challenge!
Education in the 21st century (II)
In Luxembourg, a cosmopolitan country, it makes sense that the education system allows pupils to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. Researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes take up the challenge! In Luxembourg, a cosmopolitan country, it makes sense that the education system allows pupils to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. Researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes take up the challenge!
Music education in Luxembourg: opportunities at all ages
In Luxembourg, children can begin their music education from the age of four. Several municipalities also offer lessons for adults. The University of Luxembourg provides training for future music teachers. Read on for an introduction to music education in Luxembourg.
Childcare Service Vouchers
If you work and have one or more children to look after, getting childcare is a challenge. Luxembourg offers financial assistance for childcare in quality childcare facilities.
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Luxembourg's basic education is characterised by intercultural communication, the development of individual skills and free childcare.
Languages at school
Luxembourg society is cosmopolitan. A multitude of languages are spoken on a daily basis. It is therefore logical that the education system should enable pupils to grow and learn in a multilingual environment from an early age.  Luxembourg society is cosmopolitan. A multitude of languages are spoken on a daily basis. It is therefore logical that the education system should enable pupils to grow and learn in a multilingual environment from an early age.
Secondary education
Read the storySecondary education is for children aged 12 and older. A key moment in life and in a pupil's schooling, since it involves choosing a future career, both academic and professional. That's why secondary schools in the Grand Duchy...
School Leave
Read the storyThese are the dates for the school holidays of the public institutions for the academic year 2025-2026.



All Saints

01/11/25 – 09/11/25

Christmas

20/12/25 – 04/01/26

Carnival

14/02/26 – 22/02/26

Easter

28/03/26 – 12/04/26

Pentecost (Whit Sunday)

23/05/26 – 31/05/26

Summer

16/07/26 – 14/09/26
Schooling for foreign children
Read the storyThe Grand Duchy has welcomed thousands of families from all over the world: indeed almost half the population does not have Luxembourg nationality. Each family has its own linguistic and cultural origins, but there is one thing they...
Childcare
Luxembourg provides free supervision in the majority of childcare facilities in order to provide all pupils in Luxembourg and their families with an equal service.
Quality of life
Sascha Lang: people with disabilities must be involved in defining inclusion
Sascha Lang is a communications officer at the Ministry of Family Affairs. In this interview, he shares his views on inclusion assistants at work and why he advocates greater involvement of people with disabilities.
Culture for all: an overview
Participating in cultural life is a right recognised by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and a way to improve intercultural living together. Associations and institutions are striving to make culture a right for all. Participating in cultural life is a right recognised by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and a way to improve intercultural living together. Associations and institutions are striving to make culture a right for all.
Volunteering
Giving your time is the greatest gift of all. At the Kräizbierg Foundation, corporate volunteering provides real support to people with disabilities and strengthens team spirit. Together, let's cultivate our solidarity and generosity. Giving your time is the greatest gift of all. At the Kräizbierg Foundation, corporate volunteering provides real support to people with disabilities and strengthens team spirit. Together, let's cultivate our solidarity and generosity.
Quality of life and living together in Luxembourg
Pierre Hurt, Director of the Order of Architects and Consulting Engineers (Ordre des architectes et des ingénieurs-conseils, OAI), shares his views on the challenges for architects, consulting engineers and urban planners in the 21st century.
Being a musician in Luxembourg
Discover the inspiring journey of Maya Tal, an Israeli violist living in Luxembourg, between her passion for music, discovering the country and life with the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra. Discover the inspiring journey of Maya Tal, an Israeli violist living in Luxembourg, between her passion for music, discovering the country and life with the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra.
Luxembourg elected 'very ecological' by expats
In its latest report on destinations for expats, the InterNations network put the environment and sustainability of host countries in the limelight. 60 countries were analysed and Luxembourg was ranked 10th.
Mercer 2024 Cost of Living Survey
Among 226 cities, Luxembourg ranked 47th in the 2024 cost of living survey conducted by consultancy firm Mercer. It draws comparisons between different cities and provides insight into the expenses of life around the globe. But what does this rank mean?
Public holidays in Luxembourg
Do you want to know the legal holidays in Luxembourg? Here is the official list. Do you want to know the legal holidays in Luxembourg? Here is the official list.
Work life balance: a balanced concept for a well-balanced life
A video campaign from the Ministry of Equality between Women and Men shows that most company employees opt for a balanced share of work and personal life.
Wage levels
Luxembourg attracts large numbers of workers every year thanks to its thriving economy, attractive wages and high level of well-being. Moreover, the social minimum wage and a unique indexation system guarantee lasting social harmony.
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Discrimination based on race, sexual orientation or religion, among others, is prohibited by law, and yet many people still suffer from it.  Whether you are a victim or witness, you can always count on support in Luxembourg. Discrimination based on race, sexual orientation or religion, among others, is prohibited by law, and yet many people still suffer from it.  Whether you are a victim or witness, you can always count on support in Luxembourg.
Mobility
Top 5: why it's good to live by bike in Luxembourg
In view of the popularity of cycling and its ecological aspect, Luxembourg encourages the development and practice of cycling through a multitude of initiatives and events. Do you want to know about them? Then get on the handlebars and follow us.  In view of the popularity of cycling and its ecological aspect, Luxembourg encourages the development and practice of cycling through a multitude of initiatives and events. Do you want to know about them? Then get on the handlebars and follow us.
Carsharing
Fewer cars on the road and more quality of life - that is the promise of car-sharing. Two systems exist in Luxembourg, supported by the political will that sees it as an important vector for reorganising mobility in Luxembourg.
Mobility for cross-border workers
Since 2020, public transport in Luxembourg has been free of charge. With a new pilot project in France, Luxembourg is now extending this free service beyond its national borders. Since 2020, public transport in Luxembourg has been free of charge. With a new pilot project in France, Luxembourg is now extending this free service beyond its national borders.
By plane
Read the storyFindel is Luxembourg's only commercial airport. Located a few miles outside the centre of Luxembourg City, it is an important hub for continental flights as well as international cargo transportation and storage. Did you know for example that... Read the storyFindel is Luxembourg's only commercial airport. Located a few miles outside the centre of Luxembourg City, it is an important hub for continental flights as well as international cargo transportation and storage. Did you know for example that...
Public transport
Public transport is a fast, clean and free way of getting about in Luxembourg. With a network that constantly adapts to the needs of travellers, this mode of transport is increasingly popular with residents.
Getting around by car
Read the storyThe car remains one of the pillars of mobility in Luxembourg. However, in order to face the challenges posed by climate change and to safeguard quality of life for future generations, much is being done to offer alternatives...
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
With so many offers for all kinds of bikers, it's hard not to ride a bike in Luxembourg. With so many offers for all kinds of bikers, it's hard not to ride a bike in Luxembourg.
Settling in
Where to live in Luxembourg?
Looking for that special place to move to? Whatever you are looking for, you will most certainly find your perfect spot in Luxembourg because, as small as the country may be, as diverse are the environments that you are going to encounter.
Staying connected
Read the storyLuxembourg has heavily invested into its infrastructures, mobile and fixed, and it shows. 4G and broadband everywhere allow for fast internet connections, as 5G and fibre optics networks are spreading rapidly. Luxembourg is already one of the countries...
Finding a place to live
Searching, renting, buying ... A lot of people would like to find a place to live in the Grand Duchy. This page will provide you with all the useful information you need to guide you.
Practical guide to getting settled in Luxembourg
Adjusting to life in a new country can feel overwhelming, with so much to figure out at once. That's why we've put together this guide—to help you tackle those first steps with confidence and make settling in as smooth as possible.
Housing support bonuses and services to make you feel at home
Looking for housing? Find out more about the main subsidies available for tenants and home owners, including support for sustainable housing and energy efficiency.
Health and social security
Health service
From urgent medical care to information on food safety, substance abuse or care for the elderly - this page provides you with useful information and contact numbers. From urgent medical care to information on food safety, substance abuse or care for the elderly - this page provides you with useful information and contact numbers.
Precision health – giving patients a voice
Guy Fagherazzi is an expert in epidemiology and leads the Predi-COVID survey. His main work, however, focuses on precision health, which seeks treatments adapted to the needs of each patient, a research priority in Luxembourg.
Social security
Luxembourg has one of the most effective social security systems in the world. It is accessible to both residents and cross-border workers. The right to social assistance is an important pillar of Luxembourg society.
Sport
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we take a look at eight inspirational Luxembourg sportswomen. To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we take a look at eight inspirational Luxembourg sportswomen.
Luxembourgish women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (II)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we take a look at eight inspirational Luxembourgish sportswomen. To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we take a look at eight inspirational Luxembourgish sportswomen.
Sport for all: living in harmony through active and intercultural activities
Long-term sustainable health, stronger social ties, improved mental and physical well-being, better quality of life... There are many benefits to be gained from practising leisure sport, and in Luxembourg there are programmes to suit everyone!
Top 5: Luxembourgish cyclists who made the public dream
Si les Luxembourgeois se sont fait remarquer dans beaucoup de disciplines sportives, c'est surtout dans le cyclisme qu’ils ont laissé leur empreinte. Voici cinq cyclistes luxembourgeois qui ont fait rêver des milliers (et les font encore rêver). Si les Luxembourgeois se sont fait remarquer dans beaucoup de disciplines sportives, c'est surtout dans le cyclisme qu’ils ont laissé leur empreinte. Voici cinq cyclistes luxembourgeois qui ont fait rêver des milliers (et les font encore rêver).
LIHPS - Luxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sports
Excellence! A key word of Luxembourg's high-level sport. The Luxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sports  offers services and optimal resources adapted to high performance athletes since 2019. Excellence! A key word of Luxembourg's high-level sport. The Luxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sports  offers services and optimal resources adapted to high performance athletes since 2019.
Sport infrastructure in Luxembourg
Read the storyAccording to a recent Eurostat study, Luxembourgers are only in the European average in terms of sports practice. However, the facilities and sports equipment place the Grand Duchy at the top of the podium, because the sports facilities...
Last update10.11.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit.html
Visit
Regions
The cultural South
The South of Luxembourg, the Minett, embodies a fascinating cultural metamorphosis, where industrial heritage blends with a rich artistic scene. Read on to find out more about some of the key figures involved in the cultural sector of the South and their personal cultural highlights.
Cultural capital
Luxembourg City, a cosmopolitan capital at the heart of Europe, is a cultural crossroads with a vibrant arts scene. Read on to find out more about some of the key figures involved in the sector in Luxembourg City and their personal cultural highlights. Luxembourg City, a cosmopolitan capital at the heart of Europe, is a cultural crossroads with a vibrant arts scene. Read on to find out more about some of the key figures involved in the sector in Luxembourg City and their personal cultural highlights.
The touristic South
An invitation to travel to The Land of the Red Rocks through some places you never imagined you would find in the South of Luxembourg. Let's go! An invitation to travel to The Land of the Red Rocks through some places you never imagined you would find in the South of Luxembourg. Let's go!
Éislek: adventure awaits
To the north of the Grand Duchy lies the tourist region of Eislek. The region is a genuine treasure trove for outdoor adventure enthusiasts and home to two nature reserves as well as Luxembourg's largest lake. It's also an invitation to remembrance tourism.
Mullerthal: fascinating geology and traditions
The Mullerthal, also known as Luxembourg's Little Switzerland, lies in the east of the country. With two UNESCO labels, the region offers an enchanting blend of natural and cultural heritage. The Mullerthal, also known as Luxembourg's Little Switzerland, lies in the east of the country. With two UNESCO labels, the region offers an enchanting blend of natural and cultural heritage.
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Located in the East of the country, the Moselle is named after the river that draws the 42km of natural border between the Grand Duchy and Germany. Mild climate, wine-growing tradition and European spirit are among the region's assets. Located in the East of the country, the Moselle is named after the river that draws the 42km of natural border between the Grand Duchy and Germany. Mild climate, wine-growing tradition and European spirit are among the region's assets.
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
The cradle of the European Union, Luxembourg's capital is a city of contrasts, where tradition and modernity go hand in hand.  Home to more than 160 nationalities, multilingual culture is always on the agenda and the green spaces invite you to relax.
Minett: where the industrial past shapes the future
The Minett region is located in the south of the country and is also known as the Land of the Red Rocks. Revalued industrial heritage, history(ies) of migration, trendy cities with diverse culture and UNESCO-certified nature await you! The Minett region is located in the south of the country and is also known as the Land of the Red Rocks. Revalued industrial heritage, history(ies) of migration, trendy cities with diverse culture and UNESCO-certified nature await you!
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
The tourist region of Guttland lies in the centre and west of Luxembourg. Its name is evocative of its most characteristic feature - the good land - which is a tribute to its fertile soils.  It's also an invitation to slow tourism.
Activities
Water activities in Luxembourg: cool off in lakes, rivers and swimming pools
Love the water? Looking for something a fun, sporty or relaxing water activity to do this summer? Then look no further than Luxembourg – its lakes, and rivers are ideal for a wide range of water-based activities. Love the water? Looking for something a fun, sporty or relaxing water activity to do this summer? Then look no further than Luxembourg – its lakes, and rivers are ideal for a wide range of water-based activities.
Luxembourg's top running races
Are you looking for a way to keep fit while visiting the length and breadth of Luxembourg? Here is a small selection of organised running events – a great option for keeping active all year round while taking in some of the country's memorable sights! Are you looking for a way to keep fit while visiting the length and breadth of Luxembourg? Here is a small selection of organised running events – a great option for keeping active all year round while taking in some of the country's memorable sights!
Minett Trail: 11 lodges to discover the region
Do you like walking, enjoying unique natural surroundings and discovering the industrial remains of the Terres rouges? Then the Minett Trail is for you. You can even spend the night in a unique lodge.  Do you like walking, enjoying unique natural surroundings and discovering the industrial remains of the Terres rouges? Then the Minett Trail is for you. You can even spend the night in a unique lodge.
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Did you know that every region in Luxembourg can be explored on foot via a long hiking route? So fill your water bottle, pull on your hiking boots and follow us across the country! Did you know that every region in Luxembourg can be explored on foot via a long hiking route? So fill your water bottle, pull on your hiking boots and follow us across the country!
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Would you like to combine your visit to a Luxembourg castle with a walk to enjoy nature? Then don't miss our Top 5 selection of walking trails in the vicinity of castles. Would you like to combine your visit to a Luxembourg castle with a walk to enjoy nature? Then don't miss our Top 5 selection of walking trails in the vicinity of castles.
Top 5: extraordinary activities in Luxembourg
Want to discover a part of Luxembourg that you haven't yet explored? If you're looking to visit some of the less touristy and less crowded parts of Luxembourg, you'll want to check out this page.
Explore Luxembourg City in the Belle époque
The new application "The Luxembourg Time Traveler" allows its users to travel back in time and discover the City of Luxembourg of the Belle Epoque.
Luxembourg Tourism Awards
Luxembourg Tourism Awards 2025! Synonymous with hospitality, diversity, innovation and excellence. The winners put the Grand Duchy in the spotlight. As a bonus: an exclusive mini-interview with Exploreo, winner of the innovation award. Luxembourg Tourism Awards 2025! Synonymous with hospitality, diversity, innovation and excellence. The winners put the Grand Duchy in the spotlight. As a bonus: an exclusive mini-interview with Exploreo, winner of the innovation award.
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Willing to discover the nature and biodiversity of the Grand Duchy with your family? Looking for excursion ideas for your children and their friends? Here is a selection of circular walks to entertain both young and old, while enhancing your knowledge! Willing to discover the nature and biodiversity of the Grand Duchy with your family? Looking for excursion ideas for your children and their friends? Here is a selection of circular walks to entertain both young and old, while enhancing your knowledge!
Musical activities for young people
Want to share your passion for music with the little ones in your family? Looking for ideas to awaken the musical tastes of your teenage sons? Here's our selection of face-to-face and digital musical activities!
The best apps to discover Luxembourg
Would you like to travel to Luxembourg and get to know its heritage, its tourist attractions and its culture? Then install these 10 applications on your smartphone and - with one click - the journey can begin.  Would you like to travel to Luxembourg and get to know its heritage, its tourist attractions and its culture? Then install these 10 applications on your smartphone and - with one click - the journey can begin.
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
In our Top 5 series, we are going to reveal five surprising and unique places in the capital. Less well known than their more visited competitors, these hidden gems, full of memories, are just waiting to be discovered.
Discover Luxembourg by bike
Luxembourg was considered a cycling country long before the success of the Schleck brothers. And this has become more apparent in recent years with the nationwide expansion of cycle paths and a whole series of other initiatives. Luxembourg was considered a cycling country long before the success of the Schleck brothers. And this has become more apparent in recent years with the nationwide expansion of cycle paths and a whole series of other initiatives.
Geocaching: treasure hunting
Geocaching – the most popular treasure hunt in the world has also taken Luxembourg by storm. More than 4,000 caches in the country are waiting to be discovered. But not only that. Luxembourg’s caches take you to some of the most beautiful places. Geocaching – the most popular treasure hunt in the world has also taken Luxembourg by storm. More than 4,000 caches in the country are waiting to be discovered. But not only that. Luxembourg’s caches take you to some of the most beautiful places.
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Éislek, Guttland and Minett regions! With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Éislek, Guttland and Minett regions!
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Mullerthal and Moselle regions! With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Mullerthal and Moselle regions!
Shopping in Luxembourg - You'll be spoilt for choice
With more than 1,000 stores, Luxembourg City and the surrounding area constitute the largest shopping area in the Grand Duchy and further afield. Heaven for fashionistas and serial shoppers! With more than 1,000 stores, Luxembourg City and the surrounding area constitute the largest shopping area in the Grand Duchy and further afield. Heaven for fashionistas and serial shoppers!
A tour of Luxembourg through its markets
Luxembourg towns and villages invite you to visit their markets. Come and see the wide range of fresh produce or find treasures amidst the items sold at the markets of Luxembourg. Luxembourg towns and villages invite you to visit their markets. Come and see the wide range of fresh produce or find treasures amidst the items sold at the markets of Luxembourg.
Going out in the evening
Nightlife in Luxembourg City and elsewhere in the country has developed significantly in recent years. These days, there is something for everyone, all year round.
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Looking for ideas for a family outing? Want to pass on your passion for nature, culture, or science to your children? Here's our selection of activities in the four corners of the country. Looking for ideas for a family outing? Want to pass on your passion for nature, culture, or science to your children? Here's our selection of activities in the four corners of the country.
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Go back in time to relive history, discover architecture and understand Luxembourg's industrial past through the many sightseeing tours that criss-cross the country. Go back in time to relive history, discover architecture and understand Luxembourg's industrial past through the many sightseeing tours that criss-cross the country.
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Discover Luxembourg on foot, by bicycle or mountain bike: trails and paths await you all over the country! Discover Luxembourg on foot, by bicycle or mountain bike: trails and paths await you all over the country!
Arts and culture
Cathedral Notre-Dame
Notre Dame Cathedral is one of the most visited monuments in Luxembourg. Located in the heart of the capital, this magnificent edifice was built in 1613. Visitors can admire the nave, the stained-glass windows and above all the statue of the Virgin Mary.
Places of encounter and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (I)
The rehabilitation of wasteland into creative projects will enhance the heritage for both the region and the population. In this article, we present some examples from Luxembourg.
The Slate Museum: learning and entertainment
The Slate Museum: how to learn about the country's industrial heritage in a fun way through its many events and activities.
Concert halls: an overview
They have seen the big names of the international scene come and go, and they attract great regional musicians and welcome local talent. Luxembourg has many concert halls with an eclectic musical programme.
Top 5: Bridges that must be crossed
Would you believe that Luxembourg has a total of 1,271 bridges? All of them are fascinating in their architecture and history. For our series we have chosen five of them. Get ready for a breathtaking journey.
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
In our Top 5 series, we'll tell you some unusual, little-known and surprising facts and information about Luxembourg. Are you curious? Then embark on this puzzling adventure!
Luxembourg's rose-growing heritage
Did you know that Luxembourg was referred to as Rose Country in the late 19th and early 20th century? Discover the past and present of Luxembourg's rose heritage. Did you know that Luxembourg was referred to as Rose Country in the late 19th and early 20th century? Discover the past and present of Luxembourg's rose heritage.
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette! Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette!
Architectural walk around Luxembourg City
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Luxembourg City! Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Luxembourg City!
Landscape heritage: union between culture and nature
Appreciated as places to relax, the historic parks and gardens are part of Luxembourg's heritage. We invite you to explore these living spaces, which are an essential element of individual and social well-being. Appreciated as places to relax, the historic parks and gardens are part of Luxembourg's heritage. We invite you to explore these living spaces, which are an essential element of individual and social well-being.
A tour of Luxembourg museums
Do you like museums? The Grand Duchy offers you not only the must-see museums dedicated to history and the arts, but also those devoted to iron mines, brewing art and the rural world. Over 60 museums across the country are waiting for you!
Discovering the performing arts in Luxembourg
Are you a theatre, dance or opera lover? Are you looking for the latest productions of internationally consolidated companies as well as willing to discover the national panorama? The Grand Duchy's various theatres and cultural centres offer a range of performances that will surely meet your expectations.
Luxembourg, a land of castles
Visiting the castles scattered throughout Luxembourg is the ideal opportunity to plunge into the country's history, but also to discover exhibitions and hike through natural areas.
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Are you a fan of UNESCO tourism? Luxembourg now has nine heritage sites with the UNESCO label: architecture, photography, dance, traditions, music and nature all await you in the Grand Duchy.
Relaxing
Cruises on the Moselle river
Luxembourg's Moselle region is a very popular excursion and holiday destination. Here you will find a varied range of activities, including those on the passenger ships operating on the Moselle. Please climb aboard! Luxembourg's Moselle region is a very popular excursion and holiday destination. Here you will find a varied range of activities, including those on the passenger ships operating on the Moselle. Please climb aboard!
Rural accommodation: relax in the heart of the countryside
Do you want to blend in with nature day and night? Rural accommodation in Luxembourg is evolving to include glampling cabins, attractive parking areas for visitors in motorhomes or unique accommodation. Do you want to blend in with nature day and night? Rural accommodation in Luxembourg is evolving to include glampling cabins, attractive parking areas for visitors in motorhomes or unique accommodation.
Wellness: magical moments of well-being and relaxation
Do you need some time to unwind after a working day? Are you looking for a way to restore your body and mind? Luxembourg offers a wide range of wellness centres to provide you with spa care, relaxing moments and comforting massages.
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Do you fancy a week brimming with relaxing walks amidst unspoilt landscapes to recharge your batteries after a long year of work? Need to unwind after a meeting? Luxembourg is known to be a vibrant country, but also an ideal destination for slow tourism.
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
Nature is just a stone's throw away in Luxembourg! Whether you are in the city centre, North, South, East or West of the Grand Duchy, there is always a park or a garden to escape reality and forget the stress of everyday life.
Natur and discovery
Nature for all: comfort hiking trails
Luxembourg is making its nature trails more inclusive by creating comfort hiking routes. Located in Bissen, Remich, Echternach, Grevenmacher and Redange-sur-Attert, they offer outdoor activities for all. Luxembourg is making its nature trails more inclusive by creating comfort hiking routes. Located in Bissen, Remich, Echternach, Grevenmacher and Redange-sur-Attert, they offer outdoor activities for all.
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
UNESCO is also about nature! Here is an invitation to explore the Minett UNESCO Biosphere, a biosphere reserve since October 2020, and the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall, a UNESCO World Geopark since April 2022. UNESCO is also about nature! Here is an invitation to explore the Minett UNESCO Biosphere, a biosphere reserve since October 2020, and the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall, a UNESCO World Geopark since April 2022.
Nature reserves: Naturpark Öewersauer, Luxembourg's lake district
The Naturpark Öewersauer is located to the north-west of the Éislek, in the Luxembourg Ardennes. It covers an area of 200km2 and borders on Belgium. A perfect destination if you're looking for water-based sports and relaxation! The Naturpark Öewersauer is located to the north-west of the Éislek, in the Luxembourg Ardennes. It covers an area of 200km2 and borders on Belgium. A perfect destination if you're looking for water-based sports and relaxation!
Nature reserves: Naturpark Our and the diverse landscape of the Luxembourg Ardennes
The Naturpark Our is located in the north of the Éislek, at the heart of Luxembourg's Ardennes region. It covers a surface area of 420km2 and borders Belgium and Germany. If you're looking for a diverse landscape, it's the ideal destination! The Naturpark Our is located in the north of the Éislek, at the heart of Luxembourg's Ardennes region. It covers a surface area of 420km2 and borders Belgium and Germany. If you're looking for a diverse landscape, it's the ideal destination!
Nature reserves: Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall - a geological masterpiece
The Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall is located in the central and eastern part of the country, in the Mullerthal region. It covers an area of 256km2 and forms the border with Germany. A perfect destination if you're looking for UNESCO-labelled geology! The Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall is located in the central and eastern part of the country, in the Mullerthal region. It covers an area of 256km2 and forms the border with Germany. A perfect destination if you're looking for UNESCO-labelled geology!
Nature reserves: German-Luxembourg Nature Park – Nature without borders
The German-Luxembourg Nature Park is located on both sides of the Our and Sûre rivers. It is the perfect destination for anyone who likes Premium quality hikes in protected natural surroundings. The German-Luxembourg Nature Park is located on both sides of the Our and Sûre rivers. It is the perfect destination for anyone who likes Premium quality hikes in protected natural surroundings.
Flavours
Socially responsible restaurants: fostering cultural exchanges, social cohesion and gastronomy for the greater good
It is possible to enjoy a healthy diet, discover a world of flavours from different regions of the globe and eat in an environmentally responsible way while promoting inclusion. Here is a selection of socially responsible restaurants! It is possible to enjoy a healthy diet, discover a world of flavours from different regions of the globe and eat in an environmentally responsible way while promoting inclusion. Here is a selection of socially responsible restaurants!
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
"We're Smart Green" gastronomic guide: in Luxembourg, 14 restaurants have been awarded the radish for the best vegetarian restaurants. Culinary creativity, limited environmental footprint and positive social impact! "We're Smart Green" gastronomic guide: in Luxembourg, 14 restaurants have been awarded the radish for the best vegetarian restaurants. Culinary creativity, limited environmental footprint and positive social impact!
Gault&Millau Luxembourg 2026: the best chefs, restaurants and bars
The Gault&Millau guide selects the best restaurants and brasseries, H!P locations, unmissable bars and the crème de la crème of Luxembourg's chocolatiers. Discover the 2026 winners and the latest additions to the guide dedicated to Luxembourg! The Gault&Millau guide selects the best restaurants and brasseries, H!P locations, unmissable bars and the crème de la crème of Luxembourg's chocolatiers. Discover the 2026 winners and the latest additions to the guide dedicated to Luxembourg!
Young winegrowers take up the challenge
The rising generation in winegrowing families and young people changing career are beginning to drive the industry. We spoke to three of them about the challenges and their passion for their work.
Wine tourism in Luxembourg: a feast for the senses
Explore Luxembourg's vineyards with tastings, tours and events along the Moselle valley. A unique and unforgettable experience awaits! Explore Luxembourg's vineyards with tastings, tours and events along the Moselle valley. A unique and unforgettable experience awaits!
A drone working for the L&R Kox Estate
Drones are in the process of revolutionising our society. Although certain sectors still await their entry into action, they have already begun to invade the world of wine. The L&R Kox Estate has been using a drone since 2019 to spray its vines.  Drones are in the process of revolutionising our society. Although certain sectors still await their entry into action, they have already begun to invade the world of wine. The L&R Kox Estate has been using a drone since 2019 to spray its vines.
Special wines: rarities from the Moselle terroir
Crémant, Fiederwäissen, late harvest, straw wine or ice wine – the special wines from the Moselle region surprise you every year with their excellent quality. But there's a catch: quantities are extremely limited! Crémant, Fiederwäissen, late harvest, straw wine or ice wine – the special wines from the Moselle region surprise you every year with their excellent quality. But there's a catch: quantities are extremely limited!
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Why not find out all about Luxembourg wines before taking a trip to the Moselle region? On your marks, with tasting glasses at the ready!
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
Located in the East of the country, the Moselle is named after the river that draws the 42km of natural border between the Grand Duchy and Germany. Discover the Moselle region through its wine-growing heritage.
Michelin Guide Luxembourg 2025: Michelin-starred restaurants and Bib Gourmand
Are you keen on culinary and avant-garde excellence? Do you love good food and are you looking for value for money? In Luxembourg, you can enjoy 11 Michelin-starred restaurants as well as 2 restaurants awarded the Bib Gourmand.
Last update10.11.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study.html
Work and study
Employment in Luxembourg
Luxembourg attracts international talent
Luxembourg clearly has a lot of advantages when it comes to attracting foreign workers: it is diverse, open and promotes innovation.  People from 180 countries currently live and work in the Grand Duchy.
Coworking spaces in Luxembourg
Coworking spaces in Luxembourg offer cross-border workers and local professionals a flexible working environment and foster creativity and interdisciplinary collaboration. Here you can find out everything you need to know about coworking in the Grand Duchy.
Craftsmanship, the driving force of the Luxembourg economy
With 98,000 active workers and 7,800 companies, the craft industry is considered Luxembourg's largest employer. Present in almost all sectors, it occupies a privileged place in the country's economic fabric.
Skilled crafts - employment and transfer of know-how
Skilled crafts occupy a considerable place in the economic fabric and play a key role in the creation of jobs in the Grand Duchy. The creation of new businesses and the transfer or take-over of businesses already in existence ensure its sustainability.
5 key pointers for cross-border workers in Luxembourg
Thanks to its attractive working conditions and convenient location, Luxembourg is a real magnet for cross-border workers. Although EU-citizens enjoy free access to the labour market, there are still various questions for which we have the answers.
Luxembourg's workforce
Luxembourg's employment market is unique in its own right: international, renowned as an innovation driver and a nurturing ground for personal and professional fulfilment. Discover why so many companies choose Luxembourg as their entry hub to the EU.
Languages at work: French prevails
French is the dominant language in relation to other languages on the Luxembourg labour market. It is followed by English, which has become the second most widely spoken language in the workplace.
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
Live out your passion in Luxembourg by embarking on a professional adventure in which you decide what happens next! For a quick and easy route, here are the key partners you need to turn your project into a success story. Live out your passion in Luxembourg by embarking on a professional adventure in which you decide what happens next! For a quick and easy route, here are the key partners you need to turn your project into a success story.
Studying in Luxembourg
Calling all digital enthusiasts!
In 2022, the Digital Learning Hub opened its doors in Belval. Its aim: to increase digital skills in Luxembourg. Indeed, there are still many vacancies in the digital sector.
Training the coders of tomorrow at 42 Luxembourg
42 Luxembourg is a school with a difference. It offers programming training for all code lovers out there – without teachers or traditional classes. The concept is based on peer-to-peer learning, intensive practice and hands-on projects.
Entrepreneurial education by the association Jonk Entrepreneuren Luxembourg
Learn to foster an entrepreneurial spirit! The entrepreneurial education programme of Jonk Entrepreneuren is part of the curriculum in several schools. We spoke to Nadia Battello, the company's director, about the association's programmes and values.
Entrepreneurial education: when school projects turn into successful start-ups
Jonk Entrepreneuren Luxembourg is already part of the curriculum in several schools. We would like to present four companies to you whose success story began at school!
Training in the skilled crafts sector
In recent years, the Grand Duchy has developed a number of training courses for a vast number of careers in the skilled crafts sector.
University students - budding entrepreneurs
The Entrepreneurship Programme and the Incubator of the University of Luxembourg are committed to entrepreneurship education: training, events and support for the implementation of students' ideas.
Higher education institutions
Read the storyWould you like to study in a multicultural and multilingual country in the heart of Europe? The University of Luxembourg, known the world over for its multilingualism, its international outlook and its research programmes, welcomes a good number...
Lifelong Learning
Read the storyTo address the needs of employers and employees in the face of the transformation of today's working world, Luxembourg offers a wide range of vocational training aimed at young people and adults alike (employees or jobseekers) in order...
Student accommodation
Read the storyThat's it, you have made the decision to study in Luxembourg but you don't have a home yet. So it must be said that the game is not yet won, because it should be known that one of...
Student life in Luxembourg: the essentials
Small and popular, Luxembourg, at the heart of Europe and the Greater Region, welcomes more and more students from all over the world. To help you find your way around, here is some useful information to know as a student in Luxembourg. Small and popular, Luxembourg, at the heart of Europe and the Greater Region, welcomes more and more students from all over the world. To help you find your way around, here is some useful information to know as a student in Luxembourg.
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
As a student, how to finance your studies is something you have to think about at all stages of your academic journey. In this article, you will find out more about the different forms of financial aid available to help you start the semester worry-free.
Recognition of foreign school and higher education diplomas
Luxembourg is home to a large foreign population and many people need to have their studies or diplomas recognised. We outline the various possible scenarios so that you know which government body to contact. Luxembourg is home to a large foreign population and many people need to have their studies or diplomas recognised. We outline the various possible scenarios so that you know which government body to contact.
Jobs and internships for pupils and students
Whether you're a school pupil or a student, jobs and internships give you the chance to gain some initial work experience and earn a bit of money. Read on to find out what types of internships and jobs are available and how to successfully land them. Whether you're a school pupil or a student, jobs and internships give you the chance to gain some initial work experience and earn a bit of money. Read on to find out what types of internships and jobs are available and how to successfully land them.
Last update10.11.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest.html
Invest
Competitiveness
House of Training: tailor-made training
In a decade, the House of Training has organised more than 20,000 training sessions. In an interview, director Muriel Morbé emphasises that curiosity and skills remain at the heart of the mission. In a decade, the House of Training has organised more than 20,000 training sessions. In an interview, director Muriel Morbé emphasises that curiosity and skills remain at the heart of the mission.
Sustainability Bond Framework
Read the storyOn 2 September 2020, Luxembourg launched its Sustainability Bond Framework, which meets the International Capital Markets Association (ICMA) Green, Social and Sustainability Bonds principles, the standard in the field. Just a few days later, the country also issued...
The new Silk Road leads to the Grand Duchy
Read the storyThe Grand Duchy's logistics sector has just gained an extremely important partner: the Chinese city of Chengdu, capital of Szechuan province in the centre of the People's Republic. From there, a reliable, top-quality rail link covering more than...
Portrait of the Luxembourg economy
Get to know Luxembourg’s economy, a thriving multilingual hub staunchly oriented towards the future. In this article, we give you a tour of our industrial past and tell you how we help the world face the challenges of tomorrow.
Foreign Trade
Read the storyLuxembourg has established a name for itself as a dynamic and widely open economy. The Grand Duchy is part of the European Union and the Schengen area, and it has a strategic position in the heart of Europe....
Key sectors
How digital technologies are driving the financial centre
In 2025, the financial sector continued to be the backbone of Luxembourg's economy. Jerry Grbic, CEO of the ABBL, emphasises the sector's importance for Luxembourg and discusses the rise of digital technologies. In 2025, the financial sector continued to be the backbone of Luxembourg's economy. Jerry Grbic, CEO of the ABBL, emphasises the sector's importance for Luxembourg and discusses the rise of digital technologies.
The financial sector, cornerstone of the economy
Luxembourg is one of the world's leading financial centres, and the sector forms the backbone of the country's economy. The CEO of Luxembourg for Finance talks to us about the challenges currently facing the financial centre.
Health technologies: a thriving and innovative sector
Luxembourg's HealthTech industry is booming! With flourishing public-private partnerships, innovative incubators and a prolific and supportive research environment the sector attracts talent from around the world. Luxembourg's HealthTech industry is booming! With flourishing public-private partnerships, innovative incubators and a prolific and supportive research environment the sector attracts talent from around the world.
Wood, an industry with a bright future
An ancestral material par excellence, wood today plays a key role in two of Luxembourg's major political challenges: the launch of the circular economy and the fight against the effects of climate change.
Luxembourg with one foot on the moon
With the return to Earth of the Orion spacecraft, the Artemis I mission has been completed. 21 countries are participating in this adventure, including Luxembourg. Marc Serres, CEO of the LSA, explains why this mission is important for the Grand Duchy.
Artemis - Luxembourg heads for the Moon
The United States wants to return to the Moon by 2024. The purpose of the mission is to explore the night sky and build a lunar base there. This programme is called Artemis. Eight countries are participating in this mission, including Luxembourg.
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Read the storyCircular economy is the future. The idea of endlessly recycling or even upgrading resources could solve essential problems of our time, i.e. environmental protection or scarcity of resources. Luxembourg recognised the opportunities early on and is now actively...
Maritime sector
Even though Luxembourg does not have direct access to the sea, the maritime sector has been developing since the 1990s. More than 200 ships fly the flag boasting the red lion and around 225 companies active in the sector are established in Luxembourg.
Green Finance
The Grand Duchy is already emerging as a Green Finance leader. Did you know that the first "green"' stock exchange was in the Grand Duchy?
Business and congress tourism (MICE)
Read the storyAre you looking for a unique setting for your next congress, conference, seminar or show? Are you planning a business trip? The best infrastructures can be found in Luxembourg, the heart of Europe and the ideal place to...
Information and communication technologies
Digitalisation obviously brings with it opportunities and challenges. To remain internationally competitive, the Grand Duchy is pushing ahead with the development of its digital infrastructures and cutting-edge technologies.
Industry in Luxembourg: a sector on the move
Luxembourg's industrial sector is currently presenting itself as a platform for sustainable innovation. In transition to a new industrial era, the sector is preparing for a digitalised future in order to maintain its competitiveness and resilience.
Logistics
Read the storyAre you looking for a well-connected logistics centre for your activities? Do you need first-class infrastructures to satisfy the needs of your clients? Located in the heart of Europe, Luxembourg has established itself as an ideal intercontinental and...
Aerospace
Home to the European Satellite Society and the Luxembourg Space Agency, Luxembourg has also developed the SpaceResources.lu initiative to create a favourable legal environment for companies. A universe to discover!
Automotive sector and smart mobility
A hub for the automotive industry and innovative mobility: Luxembourg offers a dynamic environment characterised by collaboration and modern infrastructure. Find out why well-known companies choose the Grand Duchy as their base for development. A hub for the automotive industry and innovative mobility: Luxembourg offers a dynamic environment characterised by collaboration and modern infrastructure. Find out why well-known companies choose the Grand Duchy as their base for development.
Financial Centre: a leading cross-border financial centre with a unique offering
Luxembourg provides international financial firms with a solution-driven financial centre that provides a wide array of services to manage cross-border international finance. Luxembourg provides international financial firms with a solution-driven financial centre that provides a wide array of services to manage cross-border international finance.
Philanthropy
Read the storyToday, philantropists are often world citizens whose action extends to several countries. The high concentration of international legal, tax and financial experts are arguments that prompt the world's philanthropists to establish their foundation in the Grand Duchy. Since...
Audiovisual production
Read the storyAlthough it is far from able to boast a long and rich tradition of national cinema, in recent years, the Grand Duchy has found its place in the international audiovisual industry. Proof of this is that a good...
Innovation
ChronoPilot: Sahar Niknam explores the perception of time
Sahar Niknam completed an impressive academic journey before arriving in Luxembourg, but focused mainly on AI. In Luxembourg, she is part of the EU-funded ChronoPilot project, which analyses how humans perceive time. Sahar Niknam completed an impressive academic journey before arriving in Luxembourg, but focused mainly on AI. In Luxembourg, she is part of the EU-funded ChronoPilot project, which analyses how humans perceive time.
What can the MeluXina supercomputer do?
Luxembourg has acquired one of the most powerful supercomputers in Europe. The new machine is capable of performing trillions of operations per second. But what is the actual use of this machine?
Autonomous driving forging ahead in Luxembourg
The 360Lab of the University of Luxembourg is the first thematic research laboratory dedicated to intelligent mobility. Discover the advances in the field of autonomous driving and its role in a safer and sustainable mobility ecosystem.
Funding programmes of the Luxembourg National Research Fund
The FNR is the main funding body for research in Luxembourg. The FNR's financing instruments seek excellence and quality in research and support PhD students, projects and programmes.
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Luxembourg has implemented a national research and innovation strategy. The goal: to become a sustainable, diverse and digital knowledge society and to build a better future. Focus on the current scientific ecosystem!
Mr Science or science for everyone
Who is behind Mr Science, the rock star of the Luxembourg scientific scene? We take stock with Joseph Rodesch and discuss the role of science communication in our society.
Top 5: Inventions and innovations made in Luxembourg
From the cradle of humanity to the present day, many inventions have marked the development of our society. Did you know that Luxembourg has also left its mark on the human adventure through its innovations? Dive into the heart of Luxembourg's genius.
MOAI.lu
Read the storyThe building sector is changing rapidly. In addition to new technologies, there is an increasingly complex legal and regulatory framework, the challenges posed by digitalisation as well as the expectations of the main contractor - all these factors...
Letzshop, the local shop that's just a click away
Letzshop, the online retailer, has developed rapidly since its launch in 2018. Its growth continued during lockdown with sales figures which literally skyrocketed, much to the delight of the online retailers! Decoding the success.
Craft business at a digital crossroads
La digitalisation est devenue une réalité dans bon nombre de métiers de l’artisanat. Si certains ne peuvent plus s’imaginer un quotidien sans outils numériques, d’autres n’ont pas encore entamé cette démarche.
Guichet.lu: the virtual gateway to public administration.
The official website of the Luxembourg public administration receives some 570,000 unique visitors per month. In principle, all citizens, whether residents or not, can knock on the door of guichet.lu. Interview with CTIE Director Patrick Houtsch.
GovTech
Read the storyWhat exactly is GovTech? Strictly speaking, GovTech is the term used for technological innovation in the field of public administration. Its ultimate goal is to enable governments to provide better services to the public, citizens and businesses alike....
FNR Awards 2025
Since 2009, the Luxembourg National Research Fund has been awarding prizes to stimulate communication between researchers and promote scientific activities aimed at the general public and young people. Discover the 2025 edition!
Meluxina: Luxembourg's new supercomputer
Luxembourg has acquired a supercomputer with an immense calculating power. The new machine is actually one of the most powerful in Europe. It is known as MeluXina and is operational since June 2021. But what will it be used for?
Blockchain
Decentralisation, transparency and immutability are the keywords of blockchain. The pillars in Luxembourg have been built to determine the right development strategy of these supply chains and to adopt them for the overall good of the country.
E-embassies in Luxembourg
E-embassies are an innovative concept in diplomatic relations that ensure the hosting of sensitive data in a friendly country with guarantees of immunity. Luxembourg hosts the e-embassies of Estonia and Monaco.
The circular economy – the circulation of information is also vital
The circular economy aims to eliminate the very concept of waste by reusing, repairing or refurbishing products. However, to succeed, it requires the circulation of resources as well as information.
Technological environment
Luxembourg provides an ideal technological environment for innovation leaders and growing businesses. Built on security and reliability with a renowned connectivity, the Grand-Duchy displays an ever-evolving digital infrastructure. Let's get technical!
Intellectual property
Read the storyApproachable and open-minded stakeholders, an extensive research and development environment and a favourable linguistic situation: Luxembourg offers an ideal environment for resorting to intellectual property rights, whether in the context of patents, trademarks, designs or models, or even...
Your business in Luxembourg
The social and solidarity economy and societal impact companies
The portal dedicated to the social and solidarity economy, the 'Impact Luxembourg' label and the Social Business Incubator confirm the dynamism of the social and solidarity economy sector in Luxembourg.
Starting up a business in Luxembourg
Luxembourg offers many advantages for setting up your own business. Would you like to become independant? Then join us to find out how to do it and the success story of Anne Bauler, master seamstress!
The bioincubator of the House of Biohealth
From the spring of 2021, the third extension of the House of Biohealth will be entirely dedicated to hosting start-ups and spin-offs from the health technology sector.
Annen Plus - modern architecture has a name
Modern, innovative and aesthetic. This is how the architectural realisation of the buildings by the Annen company could be summed up in three words. Their wooden construction is based on a very innovative process, for which they have had many merits.
Genaveh: Luxembourgish chocolate jewellery boxes
Female craftsmanship, the democratisation of high-end chocolate coated with an image of luxury and the internationalisation of 'made in Luxembourg' are Genaveh chocolate factory's recipe for success. Female craftsmanship, the democratisation of high-end chocolate coated with an image of luxury and the internationalisation of 'made in Luxembourg' are Genaveh chocolate factory's recipe for success.
Clubee – an ICT startup story
Clubee is riding a wave of success. 6 years after its foundation in 2014 and 5 years after its participation in Fit4Start, this virtual assistant for clubs and volunteer organisations is branching out to multiple markets.
FinTech, financial technologies in Luxembourg
An international, wealthy and favourable environment with an international financial centre and a solid ecosystem: ume is an innovative enterprise in the regulatory field of asset management and an example of an innovative technology enterprise.
QTRobot - autistic children's friend
La startup LuxAI a développé un robot humanoïde pour améliorer la sociabilité des enfants autistes. QT agit comme facilitateur d’interaction entre les thérapeutes et les petits patients.
SpaceTech start-ups - conquering space from the Grand Duchy
Read the storyThe launch of the Space Resources initiative in 2016 and the creation of the Luxembourg Space Agency in 2018 demonstrate the Grand Duchy's determination to create a solid, dynamic, innovative space sector and become a leading international player...
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
For innovative start-ups, the Grand Duchy is an attractive choice, with simplified access to decision-makers in both the public and private sectors and the availability of dedicated support.
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
C'est dans des bureaux modernes dans le quartier central de la gare, en face de l'actuel siège d'ArcelorMittal, qu'on y retrouve la House of Startups. Elle rassemble incubateurs, accélérateurs et centres d'innovations. En tout, elle peut accueillir entre 150-200 startups innovantes.
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Read the storyAre you looking for a gateway to Europe, a test market for a new service or product, or a strong industrial or academic partner? Luxembourg's start-up ecosystem has taken a quantum leap in the past few years. Today,...
Investment aid
Aside from standard financial aid to foster investments in research and development (R&D) for companies, many public players offer tailor-made consulting to future entrepreneurs and start-ups.
Last update10.11.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/gault-millau-luxembourg.html
Gault&Millau Luxembourg 2026: the best chefs, restaurants and bars
TheGault&Millaugastronomic guide unveils the year's winners in its latest "Gault&Millau Luxembourg2026" edition. The selection showcases the country's best restaurants and brasseries, as well as H!P locations, unmissable bars and the crème de la crème of Luxembourg'schocolatiers. The guide also highlights local produce and the country's finest wines. Chef Clovis Degrave, from the restaurantGrünewaldChef's Table, awarded the title of Chef of the Year 2026.
Clovis Degrave, Chef of the Year 2026 with Grünewald Chef's Table
Clovis Degrave is a passionate chef and entrepreneur. Having trained in the hospitality industry in France, he quickly made a name for himself in Luxembourg, notably by taking the helm of the restaurantLe Sudat the age of just 22.
In 2017, he took over theHostellerie duGrünewaldwith his partner Aline Bourscheid. It was a bold move, as this family-run hotel-restaurant in Dommeldange, which had held aMichelinstar for seven years, was a true institution in Luxembourg. Leading theHostellerie duGrünewald, he developed a model of culinary excellence.
In 2023, the couple launchedGrünewaldChef's Table, an innovative concept where guests experience a fully immersive gastronomic dining experience seated at the counter, from where they can watch the dishes being prepared. This second establishment, which earnedClovis Degravethe title ofChef of the Year 2026, is located directly opposite theHostellerie duGrünewald.
At the end of 2024, they launched their third establishment:Maison B, a contemporary brasserie in a welcoming setting in the heart of the Bridel Forest within theBiergerkraiznature reserve.
The title ofChef of the Year 2026"crowns his creativity, perseverance and entrepreneurial spirit", according to the jury. "This prestigious award recognises a bold chef who dares to delegate and knows how to listen, who enjoys challenging himself, as well as the evolution of his cuisine and his other establishments such as theHostellerie duGrünewaldandMaison B, in partnership with his wife Aline Bourscheid." He also received a score of 15.5/20, thereby earning the third toque for theGrünewaldChef's Table.
Young chef, baker, sommelier and the other 2026 award winners
The guide also selected winners in other categories:
Local produce and wines display their dominance
The 2022 edition had two major innovations: theTerroirrestaurant prize, which seeks to showcase respect for the environment and the use of local produce in the catering industry, and a special section devoted to the best wines of the Grand Duchy - the "The Stars of the Moselle". These new categories have gone from strength to strength in 2026.
TheLe Q dans le Beurre(Luxembourg City, chef Jérémmy Parjouet) wins theTerroirrestaurantprize.
When it comes towines, Marc Declerck, CEO ofGault&MillauBenelux, says: "We felt it was important to continue to promote the Luxembourg Moselle region, whose winegrowers have made enormous efforts over the last 20 years to improve quality, enabling them to compete with other wine-growing regions along the border and beyond."
Selected restaurants and artisans
The "Gault&Millau Luxembourg2026" gastronomic guide is now available in bookshops. Foodies can also check theGault&Millauappand theLuxembourg websiteto find out more about the 2026 selection.
Ma Langue Souritis still the highest ranked restaurant with a score of 18.5/20. When it comes tochocolatiers, nine locations are sure to please the palate of gourmets.
This year, the guide also notes two remarkable developments withOiOandEquilibrium, each of which has been awarded a third toque with a score of 15/20, and the newcomer of the year,fields by René Mathieu, which has been included in the guide with a score of 17/20, immediately earning four toques.
Of particular interest are the15 new locationslisted in the guide, which confirm the country's unique creative culinary environment. Here is a selection:
Last update16.03.2026
For more information
Michelin Guide Luxembourg 2025: Michelin-starred restaurants and Bib Gourmand
Socially responsible restaurants: fostering cultural exchanges, social cohesion and gastronomy for the greater good
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery/nature-for-all-comfort-hiking-trails.html
Nature for all: comfort hiking trails
Easy hiking circuits, wide paths designed for pushchairs and wheelchairs, benches situated along the trail so you can have a rest when you feel the need… Luxembourg is making its nature trails more inclusive by creating comfort hiking routes. The footpaths in Bissen, Remich, Echternach, Grevenmacher and Redange-sur-Attert are clearly signposted so that everyone can enjoy outdoor activities and improve their sense of well-being.
Comfort hiking trail Bissen
Thecomfort hiking trail Bissenis situated in the central area of the Grand Duchy, in the Guttland region. It is an easy route, suitable for the whole family thatinvites you to discover the landscape and relax in the heart of nature.
From the start of the trail, you'll be completely immersed in the forest as you enter theBei der Bonnertforest playground. Then, your journey continues through the enchanting Bonnert forest. You'll enjoy a relaxing stroll beside a stream on natural, stabilised paths while certain sections of the pathway are covered with a fine gravel surface. Also, there are plenty of benches along the way if you want to take a break.
The trail has no physical obstacles, but it does have a steeper gradient of 10-18% over a distance of 100 metres. Therefore, wheelchair users should be accompanied.
Practical information
Comfort hiking trail Remich
Thecomfort hiking trail Remichis located in the east of the country in the Moselle region. It is an easy route through the narrow streets of the town, the Jeannot Belling Park and the esplanade, offeringviews over the Moselle from Remich towards Stadtbredimus. To uncover more of this region, you can also extend the excursion by boarding one of the boats and taking a cruise along the river.
There are plenty of places to sit along the way and the path is not very steep. Therefore, the footpath is suitable for all members of the family, the elderly and people with reduced mobility.
Practical information
Comfort hiking trail Echternach Lake
Thecomfort hiking trail Echternach Lakeis located in the central-eastern area of the country, in the Mullerthal region. Surrounded by woodland, theEchternach lake trailis an easy circuit and ideally suited for families.
There are several accessible playgrounds along the route, and there's also a wheelchair swing. In summer, the swimming section of the lake provides the perfect opportunity to cool off. Pedalos and stand-up paddles are also available for hire. The route can be taken in either direction.
Practical information
Comfort hiking trail Grevenmacher
Thecomfort hiking trail Grevenmacheris located in the east of the country, in the Moselle region. It's an easy walk along theMoselle promenadeleading to one of theresidential neighbourhoodsoutside the fortress wall of Grevenmacher.
The pathway is wide with no slope greater than 10%. This makes it ideal for families, the elderly and people with reduced mobility. On the Moselle promenade there's a playground with a wheelchair swing. The route also passes the Kulturhuef, the Luxembourg's printing and playing card museum, and the butterfly garden.
Practical information
Comfort hiking trail Redange-sur-Attert
Thecomfort hiking trail Redange-sur-Attertis situated in the central area of the Grand Duchy, in the Guttland region. It is an easy and enjoyable circular trail, ideal for the whole family, through a peaceful forest.
The route has little elevation and starts at the car park of the Redange forest cemetery. It follows wide, flat paths that are easy to walk on thanks to their stabilised surface. The route crosses the Hounig forest and passes by a scenic pond, ideal for relaxing and ideal for relaxing and observing flora and microfauna that inhabit it. The pond has a large wooden boardwalk, accessible via a ramp.
This trail is particularly well-suitable for people with limited mobility. Like the pond boardwalk, a covered wooden shelter is accessible without steps. However, assistance is recommended for wheelchair users.
Practical information
Last update11.02.2026
For more information
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Minett Trail: 11 gîtes pour découvrir la région
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/top-running-races-luxembourg.html
Luxembourg's top running races
Are you looking for a way to keep fit while visiting the length and breadth of Luxembourg? Trails through woodland and rocky terrain, races amidst buildings listed for their industrial and architectural heritage, routes along the Moselle... Here is a small selection of organised running events in Luxembourg – a great option for keeping active all year round while taking in some of the country's memorable sights!
The ING Night Marathon in Luxembourg City
Every year in May, the country's biggest running event, theING Night Marathon, takes place in Luxembourg City. The route starts in Kirchberg and crosses through several of the city's districts, giving runners a chance to appreciate the contrast between the ultra-modern Kirchberg quarter and the historical Upper Town, perched on a rocky plateau.In 2026, the marathon will be held on Saturday 16th May.
Participants can choose between several disciplines: the traditional marathon, the half marathon, the team run (a four-person relay on the marathon route) and the 5k run for success (5km in teams of three).
There are also specific races for children and teenagers: the mini minimarathon (1km, ages between 5 and 12) and the minimarathon (4.2km, ages between 12 and 18).
For roller sports enthusiasts, Roll&Run offers a 7km race through the Limpertsberg district.
Even if you're not a runner, you can still get involved in the event by cheering on the participants and taking advantage of the live music and refreshment stands along the route.
Other popular classics in Luxembourg City
Apart from the ING marathon, there are a number of other popular races in and around the capital that have become firm favourites for Luxembourgers:
Luxembourg Pride Run
The third edition of theLuxembourg Pride Runtook place on 10th July 2025.The date for the 2026 edition is yet to be confirmed.
The aim of this festive sporting event is to celebrate diversity and inclusion. It is a charity race for companies, organisations and anyone who wants to show their support for the LGBTIQ+ community. All proceeds from the event will go to the organisations Rosa Lëtzebuerg and Centre LGBTIQ+ Cigale.
Three races are on the programme: kids run (1km), 5km and 10km.
NightRun Remich along the Moselle
In early summer, the venue for the sporting event is the Moselle region.The third edition of the RemichNightRuntokk place on 11th July 2025.The date for the 2026 edition is yet to be confirmed. In a friendly summer atmosphere, the race runs through the city along the Moselle for 8.5km, with virtually no change in altitude (36m). It's the perfect race for first-time runners who want to try their hand at popular races. The minimum age for participation is 12.
This night race kicks off one of Moselle's flagship sporting events: theIronman 70.3 Luxembourg. This unique triathlon in the heart of Europe is an opportunity to swim, cycle and run in three different countries in the same race!
Äischdall Trail to explore Guttland's valleys and woodland
In August, a sporting challenge awaits you in the Eisch Valley, or Äischdall, in western Luxembourg, near the Belgian border. The valley is named after the Eisch river, which flows through Belgium and Luxembourg, and theÄischdall Trail, open to runners and Nordic walkers, is a great way to discover the area. The route starts in Eischen/Äischen and crosses through forests and meadows, giving you a taste of the region's unspoilt countryside.In 2026, the race will take place on Tuesday 15th August, a public holiday.
Participants can choose between several disciplines:
The region is particularly known for its castles, earning it the name of Valley of the Seven Castles. So even if you don't want to run the race, this is a great opportunity to come along and discover the area while cheering on the participants. Refreshment stands and live music are organised for the occasion.
Sudstroum Escher Kulturlaf 2025 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Escher Kulturlaf – a glimpse of the industrial and cultural heritage of the Minett
What better way toget back into the swing of things after the summer than by taking part in a race in southern Luxembourg?TheSudstroum escher kulturlafcrosses through the Belval district and the town of Esch-sur-Alzette, former iron ore mining areas that were crucial for Luxembourg's economic development in the 20th century, giving the region its characteristic red colour – and its name!In 2026, the race will be held on Saturday 5th September.
Participants can choose between three distances: half marathon (21km), 10 miles (16km) and 10km.
Younger family members are also welcome. TheSUDenergie Mini-kulturlafis a 1000m race for children aged between 5 and 12. The main aim of this children's race is to have fun, so it isn't timed.
The event is also about celebrating culture – not only are the runners surrounded by impressive examples of converted industrial heritage, but a variety of live music acts also liven up the route.
Leopard Ultratrail Mullerthal, through the rocks in Luxembourg's Little Switzerland
If you have a taste for a challenge, then make sure you add theLeopard Ultratrail Mullerthalto your diary. Participants can choose from a series of semi self-sufficient trails among the unspoilt nature and imposing rocks of the Mullerthal. The start is at Heringer Millen.In 2026, the race took place on Saturday 12th September.
Several distances are available:
The principle of these individual races is semi self-sufficiency, in other words the ability to manage your own needs between any two refreshment points, in terms of food and drink and also clothes and safety equipment, so that you can adapt to any problems or unforeseen events (bad weather, injuries, etc.).
There are also races for children aged 4 and over with the Kids Adventure Run.
Sylvesterlaf Rambrouch – bringing the year to a close in the peaks of the Éislek region
To finish the year in sporting fashion, what better way than theSylvesterlaf Rambrouchin the Luxembourg Ardennes, on the afternoon of 31st December. The race starts at the Cultural Centre in Rambrouch.
The main distance is 10km. There will also be a 1.8km race for young runners.
All participants receive a souvenir gift after the race. And once you've finished, all that's left is to ring in the new year in style!
Last update09.02.2026
For more information
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/theatre-production-luxembourg.html
Theatre production - a varied programme of international quality
When it comes to theatre in Luxembourg, one could easily argue that there is something for everyone. Ranging from amateur theatre to prestigious internationally renowned professional drama groups, Luxembourg - despite its small size - boasts an eclectic programme that competes on an even footing with major international centres of performing arts.
Performing arts in Luxembourg
In Luxembourg, the audience can enjoyall typesof performing arts.Theatre programmes are extremely varied: Plays and music theatre, dance, shows for young audiences, etc. Some establishments are even specialised in a specific genre as you'll find out in their programme. Theatre performances are often accompanied by a framework programme and cultural activities: literary evenings, festivals, music shows, exhibitions, conferences and workshops for adults and children.
The diverse productions consist of top-rankingLuxembourgish productionsandinternational co-productions, as well asperformances of foreign groups. It is not unusual to see the biggest names in performing arts headlining major classical productions or contemporary creations:  Isabelle Huppert, Emmanuelle Béart, Richard and Romane Bohringer, Philippe Torreton, John Malkovich, Jude Law... the list goes on and on.
The world of Luxembourgish theatre is also characterised by itsmultilingualism and multiculturalism. There are plays in many languages: German, French, Luxembourgish and English, but also in other languages.
Venues
Theatres and cultural institutions offering an array of performances can be foundall over the country.Regional cultural centresare important for Luxembourgish theatre productions. Thelarge structuresin Luxembourg City and Esch-sur-Alzette feature many foreign plays and international co-productions, whileprivate theatresfocus on their own productions and co-productions with independent groups.
In the centre:
In the south:
In the north:
Associations and independent groups
At the other end of the spectrum, theatre has a social vocation. It brings together every age group, and is based above all on collective effort. More and more independentcompaniesare being set up in the Grand Duchy, bearing witness to a real interest in the performing arts. Some of them are even moving towards true professionalisation.
In this frame of mind, why not discover, for example, the programmes ofMaskénada, a group of artists known for its multidisciplinary in situ productions;Independent Little Lies, a multidisciplinary theatre group bringing together theatre professionals, artists and teachers, or those of one of the varied improvisational theatre groups that are becoming increasingly popular in Luxembourg (Ligue d'improvisation Luxembourg,Pole impro Luxembourg,Fédération luxembourgeoise d'improvisation, etc.).
Cabaret groupswrite and stage shows every year representing their political, social and satirical assessment of the year. The most famous ones areNei Revue, theCabarenertand theKabaret Sténkdéier.
Aid and support for the theatre sector
Theministry of Culturesupportsentertainment workersin difficult times.
The Ministry also supports Luxembourg's participation inAvignon's OFF Festivaland maintainscross-border cooperation with France'sGrand Est Region,within the framework of which Luxembourg is present atLa Caserne, a performance venue, with a play during the festival in Avignon.
Since 1st January 2020,a reduced VAT rate of 3%applies to services provided by writers, composers and performers, as well as to the royalties owed to them. You can find more information about this new legal framework in thecircularpublished by the Indirect Tax Authority ('Administration de l'enregistrement, des domaines et de la TVA').
In 2006 and 2018, the theme of theNational Literary Competitionwas reserved to drama. As a result, four plays by Luxembourgish authors were awarded in 2018.
Last update31.10.2025
For more information
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Dance in Luxembourg
Classical music for you to enjoy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/features/international-womens-day.html
Women's stories: legacies, struggles and horizons
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we have selected this series of articles and interviews dedicated to remarkable women — some from Luxembourg, others from elsewhere but who have chosen Luxembourg as the place to develop their lives, careers or passions.
Here is an invitation to (re)discover and celebrate Luxembourg's pioneers, leading sportswomen and women who are pursuing their careers in a country where each of them has found her place.
Some interviews were conducted several years ago, but the experiences and testimonies shared by these women remain relevant and inspiring today.
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
On the occasion of International Women's Day, a portrait of eight Luxembourg women pioneers who have set milestones in a wide range of fields, from entrepreneurship and education to politics, gastronomy and art.
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space.
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (II)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space.
Faster, higher, stronger: the unmissable women of Luxembourgish sport
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we take a look at eight inspirational Luxembourg sportswomen.
Luxembourgish women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (II)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world, we take a look at eight inspirational Luxembourgish sportswomen.
Celebrating the strength and diversity of women in Luxembourg: culture and education
Anne-Marie Reuter, Servais Prize 2025
The Servais prize is one of the country’s most prestigious literary accolades. It is awarded to works published in the previous year in Luxembourg. In 2025, the literary prize was awarded to Anne-Marie Reuter for her first novel "M for Amnesia".
Tahereh Pazouki, founder of Magrid Learning Solution
In Luxembourg, a cosmopolitan country, it makes sense that the education system allows pupils to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. Researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes take up the challenge!
Sarah Scholtes, teacher
In Luxembourg, a cosmopolitan country, it makes sense that the education system allows pupils to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. Researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes take up the challenge!
Maya Tal, musician with the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra
Discover the inspiring journey of Maya Tal, an Israeli violist living in Luxembourg, between her passion for music, discovering the country and life with the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra.
Celebrating the strength and diversity of women in Luxembourg: innovation
Arianna Arienzo, CEO of VoiceMed
Luxembourg's HealthTech industry is booming! With flourishing public-private partnerships, innovative incubators and a prolific and supportive research environment the sector attracts talent from around the world.
Sahar Niknam, artificial intelligence rights activist
Sahar Niknam completed an impressive academic journey before arriving in Luxembourg, but focused mainly on AI. In Luxembourg, she is part of the EU-funded ChronoPilot project, which analyses how humans perceive time.
Corinne Kox, innovative winemaker
Drones are in the process of revolutionising our society. Although certain sectors still await their entry into action, they have already begun to invade the world of wine. The L&R Kox Estate has been using a drone since 2019 to spray its vines.
Celebrating the strength and diversity of women in Luxembourg: business
Muriel Morbé, CEO of the House of Training
In a decade, the House of Training has organised more than 20,000 training sessions. In an interview, director Muriel Morbé emphasises that curiosity and skills remain at the heart of the mission.
Alexandra Kahn, Director of Genaveh
Female craftsmanship, the democratisation of high-end chocolate coated with an image of luxury and the internationalisation of 'made in Luxembourg' are Genaveh chocolate factory's recipe for success.
Tackling inequality and sexism
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Discrimination based on race, sexual orientation or religion, among others, is prohibited by law, and yet many people still suffer from it.  Whether you are a victim or witness, you can always count on support in Luxembourg.
Equal opportunities
Luxembourg is committed to an egalitarian society: combating stereotypes, equal pay, positive action and protection against domestic violence. Discover its key initiatives.
Gëlle Fra: one monument, a thousand women's stories
Gëlle Fra - a hallmark of society and Luxembourgish history
She was born in 1923 from a citizens' initiative to commemorate the soldiers who fell in the First World War. Her 100th anniversary is an opportunity to discover the emotional and controversial life of this golden woman!
Last update18.03.2026
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/features/spring-nature-activities.html
(Re)discovering the country in spring
Spring is the ideal time to immerse yourself in nature as it awakens and to (re)discover cities under the spring sunshine. Across the country, whatever your age or fitness level, green spaces and outdoor activities await you. With our selection of articles, set off to explore Luxembourg on foot, by bike, with your feet in the water; alone, with friends, as a couple or with your family. And don't forget to take a break for some tasty treats!
Nature reserves: total immersion in nature
Naturpark Öewersauer: Luxembourg's lake district
The Naturpark Öewersauer is located to the north-west of the Éislek, in the Luxembourg Ardennes. It covers an area of 200km2 and borders on Belgium. A perfect destination if you're looking for water-based sports and relaxation!
Naturpark Our: the diverse landscape of the Luxembourg Ardennes
The Naturpark Our is located in the north of the Éislek, at the heart of Luxembourg's Ardennes region. It covers a surface area of 420km2 and borders Belgium and Germany. If you're looking for a diverse landscape, it's the ideal destination!
Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall: a geological masterpiece
The Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall is located in the central and eastern part of the country, in the Mullerthal region. It covers an area of 256km2 and forms the border with Germany. A perfect destination if you're looking for UNESCO-labelled geology!
German-Luxembourg nature park: nature without borders
The German-Luxembourg Nature Park is located on both sides of the Our and Sûre rivers. It is the perfect destination for anyone who likes Premium quality hikes in protected natural surroundings.
Activities for hiking enthusiasts
Minett Trail: 10 stages and 11 lodges to discover the region
Do you like walking, enjoying unique natural surroundings and discovering the industrial remains of the Terres rouges? Then the Minett Trail is for you. You can even spend the night in a unique lodge.
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Did you know that every region in Luxembourg can be explored on foot via a long hiking route? So fill your water bottle, pull on your hiking boots and follow us across the country!
Hinking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Mullerthal and Moselle regions!
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Éislek, Guttland and Minett regions!
Enjoying nature with the family
Nature for all: comfort hiking trails
Luxembourg is making its nature trails more inclusive by creating comfort hiking routes. Located in Bissen, Remich, Echternach, Grevenmacher and Redange-sur-Attert, they offer outdoor activities for all.
Tours for children: nature for the little ones
Willing to discover the nature and biodiversity of the Grand Duchy with your family? Looking for excursion ideas for your children and their friends? Here is a selection of circular walks to entertain both young and old, while enhancing your knowledge!
Geocaching: treasure hunting
Geocaching – the most popular treasure hunt in the world has also taken Luxembourg by storm. More than 4,000 caches in the country are waiting to be discovered. But not only that. Luxembourg’s caches take you to some of the most beautiful places.
Rural accommodation: relax in the heart of the countryside
Do you want to blend in with nature day and night? Rural accommodation in Luxembourg is evolving to include glampling cabins, attractive parking areas for visitors in motorhomes or unique accommodation.
Rediscovering towns and villages on foot
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette!
Architectural walk in Luxembourg City
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Luxembourg City!
Sightseeing tours in Luxembourg
Go back in time to relive history, discover architecture and understand Luxembourg's industrial past through the many sightseeing tours that criss-cross the country.
Top 5: special villages worth visiting
Join us on a journey to the five most extraordinary villages of the Grand Duchy. Explore both well-known and lesser-known places – from tiny, hidden hamlets to sites of European history.
A springtime cycling trip
Discover Luxembourg by bike
Luxembourg was considered a cycling country long before the success of the Schleck brothers. And this has become more apparent in recent years with the nationwide expansion of cycle paths and a whole series of other initiatives.
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
With so many offers for all kinds of bikers, it's hard not to ride a bike in Luxembourg.
Top 5: why it's good to live by bike in Luxembourg
In view of the popularity of cycling and its ecological aspect, Luxembourg encourages the development and practice of cycling through a multitude of initiatives and events. Do you want to know about them? Then get on the handlebars and follow us.
Spring with your feet in the water
Top 5: most picturesque rivers
Sail or walk along Luxembourg's rivers and discover some of the country's most beautiful landscapes. From north to south, each region is brimming with natural beauty and historical landmarks.
Cruises on the Moselle: relaxation in the sun
Luxembourg's Moselle region is a very popular excursion and holiday destination. Here you will find a varied range of activities, including those on the passenger ships operating on the Moselle. Please climb aboard!
1st May marks the start of the bathing season
Love the water? Looking for something a fun, sporty or relaxing water activity to do this summer? Then look no further than Luxembourg – its lakes, and rivers are ideal for a wide range of water-based activities.
Landscape heritage: where nature and heritage meet
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
UNESCO is also about nature! Here is an invitation to explore the Minett UNESCO Biosphere, a biosphere reserve since October 2020, and the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall, a UNESCO World Geopark since April 2022.
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Would you like to combine your visit to a Luxembourg castle with a walk to enjoy nature? Then don't miss our Top 5 selection of walking trails in the vicinity of castles.
Landscape heritage: union between culture and nature
Appreciated as places to relax, the historic parks and gardens are part of Luxembourg's heritage. We invite you to explore these living spaces, which are an essential element of individual and social well-being.
Luxembourg's rose-growing heritage: Luxembourg, a Rose Country
Did you know that Luxembourg was referred to as Rose Country in the late 19th and early 20th century? Discover the past and present of Luxembourg's rose heritage.
Food and drink: nature's bounty
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
"We're Smart Green" gastronomic guide: in Luxembourg, 14 restaurants have been awarded the radish for the best vegetarian restaurants. Culinary creativity, limited environmental footprint and positive social impact!
Apiculture Jungels, the empire of bees
In the Luxembourg village of Brandenbourg, Victor Jungels raises over 15 million bees and continues a 35-year-old family tradition. His pure and local honey goes straight from the hive to the jar. Read on for an immersion into this buzzing world.
Maitrank: the spring drink
When the first rays of spring sunshine give the world a new splendour and bathe the woods in a delicate green, it is also time to savour a regional speciality: Maitrank.
Projects and people who cultivate Luxembourg's nature
Forests: guardians of treasures
The forests of the Grand Duchy and other regions are home to a wide range of animal and plant species.  In this article, we will take a closer look at the woodlands of Luxembourg and talk to Michel Dostert, an expert in forest management.
Natura 2000: European nature conservation
Luxembourg boasts an impressive variety of unique landscapes and natural areas. To protect these and preserve them for future generations, the Grand Duchy is implementing conservation programmes, such as the Natura 2000 European protection network.
Organic farming in Luxembourg
The agricultural sector in Luxembourg is undergoing profound changes. Many farmers are ready to leave conventional agriculture in order to turn to local marketing that addresses customers directly. Interview.
In luxembourg, sustainable wines in the making
Luxembourg wines and crémants enjoy an excellent reputation. However, the millennia-old tradition of winegrowing has undergone a transformation in terms of sustainability, organic viticulture and technical developments.
Last update10.03.2026
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/features/tourism-minett-culture-history.html
Minett
Marked by its steelmaking past, the Red Lands region long lived to the rhythm of industry. After its gradual decline at the end of the 20th century, the area forged a new identity. Former industrial sites have been transformed into cultural venues, urban districts, and educational spaces. But the region also offers many opportunities for outdoor leisure, with hiking trails and cycling paths running across its entire landscape. Come and discover the Red Lands, where history and modernity blend harmoniously, as if forged in steel. And because reinvention is part of its nature, the region has also become a true land of science, where innovation and research shape the future.
Explore the Red Lands
The touristic South
An invitation to travel to The Land of the Red Rocks through some places you never imagined you would find in the South of Luxembourg. Let's go!
Minett Trail: 11 lodges to discover the region
Do you like walking, enjoying unique natural surroundings and discovering the industrial remains of the Terres rouges? Then the Minett Trail is for you. You can even spend the night in a unique lodge.
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
The tourist region of Guttland lies in the centre and west of Luxembourg. Its name is evocative of its most characteristic feature - the good land - which is a tribute to its fertile soils.  It's also an invitation to slow tourism.
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Go back in time to relive history, discover architecture and understand Luxembourg's industrial past through the many sightseeing tours that criss-cross the country.
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
UNESCO is also about nature! Here is an invitation to explore the Minett UNESCO Biosphere, a biosphere reserve since October 2020, and the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall, a UNESCO World Geopark since April 2022.
Industrial heritage
The steel industry and Luxembourg
Between the mid-19th century and the late 20th century, the country's fate was intrinsically linked to the steel industry.  With its decline from 1975 onwards, the country's economy diversified and the 'Luxembourgish social model' was established.
Minett: where the industrial past shapes the future
The Minett region is located in the south of the country and is also known as the Land of the Red Rocks. Revalued industrial heritage, history(ies) of migration, trendy cities with diverse culture and UNESCO-certified nature await you!
Places of encounter and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (I)
The rehabilitation of wasteland into creative projects will enhance the heritage for both the region and the population. In this article, we present some examples from Luxembourg.
Third places and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (II)
The rehabilitation of wasteland into creative projects will enhance the heritage for both the region and the population. In this article we present the National Centre for Industrial Culture, which works to preserve and enhance this heritage.
The South, Arts and Culture
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. Follow us on this architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette!
Concert halls: an overview
They have seen the big names of the international scene come and go, and they attract great regional musicians and welcome local talent. Luxembourg has many concert halls with an eclectic musical programme.
Activities for young and old
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Did you know that every region in Luxembourg can be explored on foot via a long hiking route? So fill your water bottle, pull on your hiking boots and follow us across the country!
Top 5: extraordinary activities in Luxembourg
Want to discover a part of Luxembourg that you haven't yet explored? If you're looking to visit some of the less touristy and less crowded parts of Luxembourg, you'll want to check out this page.
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Willing to discover the nature and biodiversity of the Grand Duchy with your family? Looking for excursion ideas for your children and their friends? Here is a selection of circular walks to entertain both young and old, while enhancing your knowledge!
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Looking for ideas for a family outing? Want to pass on your passion for nature, culture, or science to your children? Here's our selection of activities in the four corners of the country.
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
With one of the densest pedestrian networks in Europe and more than 5,000km of footpaths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet. Discover the Éislek, Guttland and Minett regions!
The Minett, Land of Science ...
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Luxembourg has implemented a national research and innovation strategy. The goal: to become a sustainable, diverse and digital knowledge society and to build a better future. Focus on the current scientific ecosystem!
The bioincubator of the House of Biohealth
From the spring of 2021, the third extension of the House of Biohealth will be entirely dedicated to hosting start-ups and spin-offs from the health technology sector.
Funding programmes of the Luxembourg National Research Fund
The FNR is the main funding body for research in Luxembourg. The FNR's financing instruments seek excellence and quality in research and support PhD students, projects and programmes.
QTRobot - autistic children's friend
La startup LuxAI a développé un robot humanoïde pour améliorer la sociabilité des enfants autistes. QT agit comme facilitateur d’interaction entre les thérapeutes et les petits patients.
... and scientists
Mr Science or science for everyone
Who is behind Mr Science, the rock star of the Luxembourg scientific scene? We take stock with Joseph Rodesch and discuss the role of science communication in our society.
ChronoPilot: Sahar Niknam explores the perception of time
Sahar Niknam completed an impressive academic journey before arriving in Luxembourg, but focused mainly on AI. In Luxembourg, she is part of the EU-funded ChronoPilot project, which analyses how humans perceive time.
Last update06.03.2026
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/features/articles-top5.html
Top 5 articles - Luxembourg at your fingertips
Want to know more about the Grand Duchy, but don't have time for a long read? Our Top 5 articles provide you with summary information on a variety of subjects and allow you to discover our country from every angle.
Luxembourg's population presented
Top 5: surprising key figures about Luxembourg
1952 Luxembourg athlete Josy Barthel wins the only gold medal on the Olympiad. 2003, the artist Su-Mei Tse receives the first Golden Lion at the Venice Biennale and 20 Luxembourg crémants are decorated with gold in 2020. More amazing figures here!
Top 5: world famous Luxembourgers
The Grand Duchy is promoted through various channels. But above all, it is the Luxembourgers who represent their country at home and, above all, around the world. Discover five internationally successful people here!
Top 5: iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction
This time around, our Top 5 series casts a light on five iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction. Comic books, detective novels and series, 2D and 3D animation and fables for children offer ideal opportunities to uncover the spirit of Luxembourg.
Top 5: environmentally friendly innovative projects
As part of the fight against climate change and its consequences on nature, eco-responsible commitments in Luxembourg have flourished. Let's take a closer look at a few good ideas.
Top 5: Luxembourgish cyclists who made the public dream
Si les Luxembourgeois se sont fait remarquer dans beaucoup de disciplines sportives, c'est surtout dans le cyclisme qu’ils ont laissé leur empreinte. Voici cinq cyclistes luxembourgeois qui ont fait rêver des milliers (et les font encore rêver).
Top 5: why it's good to live by bike in Luxembourg
In view of the popularity of cycling and its ecological aspect, Luxembourg encourages the development and practice of cycling through a multitude of initiatives and events. Do you want to know about them? Then get on the handlebars and follow us.
Journey into our past
Top 5: Historic dates in Luxembourg that you need to know
Let us take you on a journey through 1,000 years of eventful European history.
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Today we will introduce you to five famous people who stayed in Luxembourg. Among them is the German poet and novelist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, who made several visits to the Grand Duchy.
Top 5: agreements that have shaped Luxembourg's history
Top 5: we take a look at the key moments in Luxembourg's history through five agreements that have marked our past, define our present and point to our future.
Your invitation to discoveries
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Would you like to combine your visit to a Luxembourg castle with a walk to enjoy nature? Then don't miss our Top 5 selection of walking trails in the vicinity of castles.
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
In our Top 5 series, we are going to reveal five surprising and unique places in the capital. Less well known than their more visited competitors, these hidden gems, full of memories, are just waiting to be discovered.
Top 5: extraordinary activities in Luxembourg
Want to discover a part of Luxembourg that you haven't yet explored? If you're looking to visit some of the less touristy and less crowded parts of Luxembourg, you'll want to check out this page.
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Did you know that every region in Luxembourg can be explored on foot via a long hiking route? So fill your water bottle, pull on your hiking boots and follow us across the country!
Top 5: Bridges that must be crossed
Would you believe that Luxembourg has a total of 1,271 bridges? All of them are fascinating in their architecture and history. For our series we have chosen five of them. Get ready for a breathtaking journey.
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
In our Top 5 series, we'll tell you some unusual, little-known and surprising facts and information about Luxembourg. Are you curious? Then embark on this puzzling adventure!
Last update19.09.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/emoxies.html
EmoXies
Discover EmoXies
EmoXies: explore the universe of Luxembourg's emojis
Called "EmoXies", alluding to the "X" of the Luxembourg Signature, these emojis offer everyone the possibility to give a "Luxembourg" touch to their messages.
Developed byLuxembourg – Let's Make It Happen, EmoXies are small, iconic illustrations that represent Luxembourg in all its facets. Their use is not confined to the digital world, but can also be transposed into the printed, audiovisual and many other fields. As long as you do not modify them or use them for commercial purposes, you are free to use them as you wish!
Curious to know more about EmoXies? Want to suggest a new one? See the bottom of the page for all the information.
Happy EmoXie-ing!
Download the mobile app.
Download all the EmoXies
EmoXies (Video/Audio)
Why and for whom?
EmoXies playfully reflect the different facets of our beautiful country and give you an insight into the Luxembourg way of life. The Luxembourgish interpretation of emoji was developed as a participatory tool to be used, applied and shared by the general public, institutions and other actors.
They are fun to use and can easily be integrated into your communication, just as regular emojis.
The EmoXies’ use is not confined to the digital world alone, as other applications in print and audio-visual productions are both thinkable and welcome!
Have you got an idea for an EmoXie?
The first set of EmoXies covered a wide range of standard themes representative of Luxembourg. Nevertheless, we do not want to leave it at that, since our first set of EmoXies and themes is non-exhaustive.
If you have a suggestion for an EmoXie, that you think is both relevant and representative of Luxembourg, we are all ears! Private individuals may indeed submit their concept along with a first draft of its design via this application form. Your suggestion will be evaluated by the Inspiring Luxembourg committee. Please be aware that in case of a favourable decision, your design may be graphically altered to ensure a visual coherence with the existing EmoXies.
Submission criteria
The proposed theme must be closely connected to Luxembourg as a country with its very own past, present and future in order to inspire and serve the purpose of shining a positive spotlight on Luxembourg as a whole.
Besides being relevant, the submitted theme should also be representative of Luxembourg, which means it should accurately reflect key aspects of Luxembourg, its people, culture or any other category.
Content used to commercialize, promote or advertise a product, service, business or brand will not be accepted. Thank you for your understanding.
Content operating or promoting discrimination on the grounds of age, religion, race, sex, gender or sexual orientation constitutes prohibited content.
Last update16.01.2026
For more information
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications.html
Publications
Last update24.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/contact.html
Let'sconnectWe'd love to hear from you.
Contact
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
More information aboutData protection.
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/plan-du-site.html
Sitemap
Last update15.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/a-propos-du-site.html
About this site
Missions of the portal
Luxembourg.lu is theofficial portal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. Its objectives are:
To respond to those missions, Luxembourg.lu contains articles about different topics, tools that may be of interest to visitors and a space dedicated to the the promotion of the country's signature.
Information quality
The site's content is adapted and updated regularly, with the aim ofproviding you with reliable content. However, should an error have found its way into a page or should you want to suggest new content,please contact us viaour contact form.
Editor of the portal
Luxembourg.lu isedited by theInformation and Press Service of the government(Service information et presse du gouvernement, SIP).
It has been set up with the help oftheGovernment IT Centre(Centre des technologies de l'information et l'État, CTIE).
For all queries relating to this site and its contents, please visit theContact page.
Last update16.09.2022
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/accessibilite.html
Accessibility
The body making the statement"Information and Press Service"is committed to making its website accessible, in accordance with thelaw of 28 May 2019on the accessibility of websites and mobile applications of public sector bodies. This accessibility statement applies to:https://luxembourg.public.lu
What is digital accessibility?
Everyone should be able to easily use and consult the information on a website or an app, in particular people with disabilities and/or using assistive software or specialised equipment (blind, partially sighted or otherwise disabled people).
Compliance status
This website ispartially compliantwith the European StandardEN 301 549andthe Framework for Assessing Web-Accessibility (RAWeb) version 1, due to the reasons listed below.
Non-accessible content
The content listed below is non-accessible for the following reason(s):
Non-compliance
Please refer to theFrench versionfor this section.
Disproportionate burden
Content not within the scope of the law of 28 May 2019
Preparation of this accessibility statement
This statement was prepared on16 December 2025. The declarations contained in this statement are accurate and based on an actual evaluation of this website compliance with the requirements defined inRAWeb 1, such as an assessment carried out by a third-party: Access42.
Control procedure
Websites created under the Renow standardisation reference system are developed within a generic and centralised framework and architecture in accordance with project management processes and theRenow checklist. To guarantee neutrality, we regularly call on accessibility experts to check the compliance of sites or new features.
Each site is evaluated at several stages:
Once the site is online, checks are carried out as follows:
During evaluations, the site is tested with the most common screen readers, tablets, mobile phones and PCs. They are also tested with different web browsers (compatibility up to 2 versions below the current version).
Contributor competencies
The work procedures include the application of internet guidelines at the various stages of the site's development (writing, management, development).
Our employees have the knowledge and skills required to correctly apply the Internet guidelines.
Feedback and contact information
If you notice a lack of accessibility, send us an email toaccessibilite@luxembourg.public.lu: describe your problem and specify the page on which it occured. We commit to replying to you within 1 month. Within reasonable limits, the correction of the accessibility issue will preferably be carried out online such as to remedy the problem in a sustainable way. Should this not be possible, the information you requested can be made available to you in an accessible format of your choice:
Enforcement procedure
Should the reply be unsatisfactory, you also have the possibility of informing theInformation and Press Service, the body responsible for supervising accessibility, via itsonline complaint formor theOmbudsperson, the mediator of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
This statement is based on the model set out in theImplementing Decision (EU) 2018/1523. This model is owned by the European Union and licensed under aCreative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.
Last update16.12.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/aspects-legaux.html
Legal aspects
Table of contents
Editor of the portal
The portal is the official presentation website of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. As the Grand Duchy's international business card on the web, it gives a unique and non-commercial access to information about the country.
The portal is the property of the Luxembourg State, represented by the Government's Information and Press Service (Service information et presse, SIP). The Information and Press Service contributes to this portal in order to promote public access to information about the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
General Terms and Conditions of Use (GTCU) of the website.
Any person using the information, documents, products, software and/or services (hereinafter collectively referred to as the"Services") offered by this website shall be deemed to be aware of, and to have accepted, all the provisions of these general terms and conditions of use.
"Body"means the government authority, ministry, administration, or any other government organisation that is solely or jointly responsible for this portal.​
User obligations
The portal is accessible via the internet. The user declares that they are aware of the risks involved and accept those risks. They must guard against the effects of computer hacking by implementing suitable and secure computer settings.​
The Luxembourg State accepts no liability for any loss or damage which the user may suffer, directly or indirectly, in connection with browsing on this website or using the services which it offers, or from accessing any of the other internet websites to which it refers.
Use of the portal is free.​
Cookies management
This portal uses client-side cookies. These are small text files that are used to analyse users' browsing patterns and habits (frequency and duration of visits, pages viewed, etc.).​
They are sent by the portal and stored in a special folder on the user's computer. In particular, they contain the name of the server that wrote it, an identifier in the form of a unique number and an expiry date. The unique identifier allows the website to "remember" the user's computer whenever they visit the website. Session cookies are deleted from the user's computer when the session is closed. However, persistent cookies remain on the user's computer for one month after the end of the session.
The user can decide whether or not to allow the portal to store cookies on their computer. They may change their browser settings at any time to prevent cookies from being accepted and stored. Additionally, from their browser, the user can delete any cookies that have already been stored on their computer (see the Cookies Policy).
The use of certain features of this site may be limited or disabled if the user does not accept cookies from the website. Hence, it is recommended that users update their browser settings to accept cookies from the website.
Modification of the portal
The Luxembourg State reserves the right to develop, modify or suspend this website, without prior notice, for maintenance or updating purposes or for any other reason which may be considered necessary.
In particular, the Luxembourg State may at any time withdraw, add, supplement or clarify all or any part of the information and Services contained in or offered on this website. The Luxembourg State may not be held liable for any direct or indirect damage in connection with such modifications.
General limitations of liability​
The Luxembourg State will use its best endeavours to ensure that this website is as widely available as possible. However, it accepts no liability should the website become temporarily or wholly unavailable.
The Luxembourg State will use its best endeavours to ensure the security of the computer system. However, it accepts no liability in the event of a cyber attack or the website becoming temporarily or wholly unavailable.
The Luxembourg State will use its best endeavours to ensure that the information published on the portal and on social networks is accurate. However, it may not be held liable, in particular in the event of omission to update information or a form, in the event of errors in the handling of the system or encoding, inaccuracies, gaps in the information provided or any errors or inaccuracies. The aim is to disseminate accurate, up-to-date information emanating from a variety of sources, but the Luxembourg State is unable to avoid all risks of material error. None of the information published on this portal should be considered as exhaustive or as a commitment from the State. Simplified versions and translations are provided for information only. Only legal texts published in the Mémorial (Official Journal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg) shall be deemed authoritative. The information appearing on this portal is of a general nature. It is not tailored to personal or specific circumstances, and therefore cannot be regarded as constituting personal, professional or legal advice to the user. If the user needs personal or specific advice, they should always consult the competent departments within the different administrative bodies.​
Limitations of the portal's liability​
The portal expressly cannot accept liability for any consequences, whether direct or indirect, arising from:​
Links to related sites​
For users' convenience, this portal may contain links to other websites which they may find useful or interesting. The Luxembourg State, and more specifically the "Body", does not systematically monitor the content of those websites. Consequently, they may not be held liable for the content of those websites, and particularly for the legality or accuracy of such content.
Intellectual property
The portal, all the elements contained therein (including the layout), and the information and services are protected by the relevant intellectual property and copyright laws.
Unless otherwise stated, the copyright on the content of the portal is held by the State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.​
Unless otherwise specified, the Luxembourg State grants no license or authorisation with regard to the intellectual property rights which it holds in respect of the portal, the elements it contains, or the Services. Furthermore, the services may not be reproduced in full or in part, in any form whatsoever, and using any means whatsoever, without first obtaining written authorisation from the Body.
Unless otherwise specified, the user is authorised to consult, download and print the documents and information available under the following conditions:​
The above rights that are implicitly and explicitly granted to users constitute authorisation of use and in no way constitute a transfer of ownership of rights, property or anything else in respect to this portal.
For all use other than as stipulated above, please contact us using the  contact form.
Changes to the General Terms and Conditions of Use
These general terms and conditions of use maybe modified or supplemented at any time, without prior notice, in line with changes made to this website or changes in the law, or for any other reason which may be considered necessary. It is the responsibility of the users to acquaint themselves with the general terms and conditions of use of this site, of which only the most up-to-date version accessible online shall be deemed to be in force. It is possible that, in the interval between two visits to the portal, the general terms and conditions of use may have changed, and thus it is the user's responsibility to read through those conditions before using the portal once again.
Applicable law and competent courts
Any dispute concerning the use of this portal and its Services shall be subject to Luxembourg law and shall fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Precisions on the terms and conditions of use of the application "Emoxies"
The emoxies.lu website, the Emoxies application and their content are the property of the Luxembourg State, represented by the Ministry of the Economy.
Unless otherwise specified, the user is authorised to consult, download or print documents of the image (Emoxies) and animated image (GIF Emoxies) type without prior request.
The application and the website are intended for personal, non-commercial use. Any use of the content of the website, the application or any other element composing the website and the application outside this personal and private use requires the prior written authorisation of the Ministry of the Economy.
The rights granted to you, implicitly or explicitly, constitute an authorisation for use and in no case an assignment of rights, property or otherwise relating to this website and the application.
For all uses other than those stipulated above, please send us your request by email toinfo@imagedemarque@eco.etat.lu.
If the user notices an anomaly or encounters any problems with the application, they are invited to inform us by means of the following email address:info@imagedemarque@eco.etat.lu.
In general, for any complaint, the user can contact the publisher of the website and the application at the following address:info@imagedemarque@eco.etat.luand the following phone number:​ (+352) 247-72436.
Personal data protection.
General information
The personal data communicated by the user are processed in accordance withRegulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
The Luxembourg State collects no personal data other than the IP addresses contained in the server logs. These are collected for security reasons. User consent is not required before visiting this portal.
The controller for these processing operations is the "Body" that is responsible for this portal.​
Users can file claims relating to the protection of their personal data through the various communication channels available, and directly to the controller who, in this case, is the "Body" responsible for this portal. Users can also file claims with the "Body"'s data protection officer at the following email address:dataprotection@sip.etat.lu. The user may also contact theNational Commission for Data Protection, located at 15 Boulevard du Jazz, L-4370 Belvaux, for any dispute in this area.
Portal contact form​
The information about you collected through the portal contact form needs to be processed by the "Body" concerned  to deal with your request.​
By filling in the form, you agree that your personal data may be processed as part of the processing of your request. The data are retained by the "Body" in question for as long as needed to achieve the purpose of the processing operation(s).
As the retention period for personal data depends on the type of request, the "Body" will communicate the applicable retention period, or the criteria used to determine it, on request, on a case-by-case basis.​
The recipient of your data is the "Body" responsible for processing your request. Please contact the "Body" you are filing your request/application with to find out who the recipients of the data in this form are.
Under the terms of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, you have the right to access, rectify and, where applicable, request the erasure of any information relating to you.​ You are also entitled to withdraw your consent at any time.​
Additionally, unless the processing of your personal data is compulsory, you may, with legitimate reasons, oppose the processing of such data.
If you wish to exercise these rights and/or obtain a record of the information held about you, please contact the concerned "Body" using the contact details provided on the form. You also have the option of filing a complaint with the National Commission for Data Protection, located at 15 Boulevard du Jazz, L-4370 Belvaux.
Processing related to audience measurement​
Certain data relating to the user's hardware and software, which are not capable of revealing the user's identity, are collected when they visit the public-domain portal. The sole purpose of collecting such data is to garner statistics on website traffic (type of browser, resolution, approximate location, and so on) in order to provide users with the best possible experience.
The user's full IP address is not retained under any circumstances. Only part of the IP address is retained for the purpose of computing overall statistics, and there is no way of identifying users.
This data is retained and hosted in Europe, in a solution provided by a subcontractor – specifically, Adobe Systems Inc. – who, as such, is subject to the same legal obligations regarding the protection of personal data, if this data were to be harvested in the future.​
The data are retained for no longer than is necessary to observe how audiences evolve as a function of browser use, resolution settings or other available statistical data.​
The controller for these processing operations is the "Body" responsible for this website.​
Processing related to online surveys​
Users' data is harvested, with their permission, for the sole purposes of conducting surveys for the State's administrative bodies. In addition, technical audience-measurement data are collected at the same time.
The data is retained for the duration of the survey, plus a few weeks for the results to be statistically analysed.​
These surveys are conducted directly on the website of a subcontractor – specifically, surveygizmo.eu, developed by Widgix Limited – located in the United States. The data is hosted in Europe. That subcontractor is subject to the same legal obligations regarding the protection of personal data, as the surveys are carried out for or by users from the European Union.
The procedures by which these surveys are carried out are such that none of the collected data can be used to personally identify the user. Even by combining technical identifier data (IP address or information about the user's browser or device) and data harvested from multiple surveys, the subcontractor operating the platform would still be unable to personally identify the users.
The data controller and the data recipient is the "Body" responsible for the portal, and which commissioned the survey.​
Processing linked to newsletter management
The email address provided by the user when they sign up for the website newsletter will be shared with a subcontractor for the sole purpose of disseminating the newsletter. That subcontractor – Mailjet, based in Paris, France – is subject to the same legal obligations with regard to the protection of personal data. To prevent abuse of the system, the user must confirm their subscription by clicking on a link sent to the email address they provided.
The user may unsubscribe at any time using a link provided in each email, or by contacting the "Body" responsible for the website. In the event of problems using the newsletter, the user must also contact the Body responsible for the site.  The user's data will not be kept for longer than their subscription lasts.
The controller for these processing operations is the "Body" responsible for this website.​
Presence on the social networks
Moderation policy​
Any user who joins this website's social-networks community undertakes to refrain from any form of discrimination based on race, ethnic origin, religion, gender, sexual orientation, age, nationality, disability, marital or employment status.​
Comments which are insulting, racist, sexist or offensive have no place on the social networks. They will be deleted and reported.
Languages
The primary language used by this website on the social networks is English and/or French. Depending on the situation and on the target audiences, information may be published in the other two national languages (German and Luxembourgish).
As far as possible, replies to all questions and comments will be in the user's language.
Last update24.02.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/foundation-grand-duke-guillaume-grand-duchess-stephanie.html
The Grand Duke and Grand Duchess Foundation: There when no one else is
With the accession to the throne on 3 October 2025, Luxembourg celebrates the arrival of its new grand ducal couple. ​ Echoing this historic milestone, a new foundation has been established: ​ the Grand Duke Guillaume and Grand Duchess Stéphanie Foundation.  It is structured around several areas: ​ supporting disadvantaged people through social action, working alongside people with disabilities to promote their inclusion and encouraging artistic creation. ​
Restoring hope, dignity and prospects to people in great difficulty.​ This is the credo of the Grand Duke Guillaume and Grand Duchess Stéphanie Foundation. ​ Young in its creation, it also reflects the renewal brought about by the new Grand Ducal couple.
Officially established in mid-September, it is part of a long dynastic tradition in which royal houses have always placed solidarity at the heart of their values. ​ In this spirit, the Grand Ducal Court specifies that the new foundation will take over all of the social commitments previously undertaken by the Grand Duke Henri and Grand Duchess Maria Teresa Foundation. ​
A mission focused on the country
The mission of the Grand Duke Guillaume and Grand Duchess Stéphanie Foundation is to support the most vulnerableand to reach out to those who fall through the cracks of the social safety net, according to the Court. ​
However, unlike the Henri and Maria Teresa Foundation, which operates beyond national borders, the Grand Duke Guillaume and Grand Duchess Stéphanie Foundation focuses its efforts on Luxembourg,particularly on people in serious difficulty who reside in the country.
Its aim is to provide practical assistance tailored to the country's needs, while placing social action at the heart of its mission, emphasises Norbert Becker, President of the Property Administration.
Requests for assistance, made by social welfare offices, are assessed by teams of qualified professionals who decide, based on their relevance, whether support should be provided. ​ In exceptional circumstances, the decision shall be taken by the Board of Directors, composed of Their Royal Highnesses The Grand Duke and The Grand Duchess, as well as the President of the Administration of the Grand Ducal Assets. ​However, the Guillaume Foundation cannot do everything, nor can it do everything for everyone, but it wants to take action where it really matters, says Norbert Becker. ​
Several pillars of solidarity ​
Beyond its support for disadvantaged people,the Foundation is also committed to promoting the full and dignified inclusion of people with disabilities– whether physical, mental or social – in all areas of life, including education, work, culture and social life. ​
At the same time, the Foundation wishes to support and initiate meaningful projects in the fields of education, youth, sport, health, environmental and animal protection, and the defence of human rights. ​ The cultural projectDe Mains de Maîtresis a fine example of this. ​ Supported by the Grand Ducal couple, it showcases the talent of artisans and artists. ​ Created in 2016 on the initiative of the heir couple, theDe Mains De MaîtresBiennial has become one of Europe's must-see events in less than ten years. ​
Last update12.03.2026
For more information
As one reign begins, another comes to an end
Art and craft trades
The symbols of the dynasty
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/top-5-surprising-numbers.html
Top 5: surprising key figures about Luxembourg
In 1952, the Luxembourg athlete Josy Barthel won the only Olympic gold medal for his country of birth. In 2003, the artist Su-Mei Tse was awarded the first Golden Lion for National Pavilions, a prize awarded to the best national participation in the International Exhibition of Contemporary Art in Venice, for her installations and videos in the Grand Duchy's pavilion. In 2020, twenty Luxembourg sparkling wines (crémants) received a gold medal at the 30thConcours national des crémants de la France et du Luxembourg.
Are you surprised? In this article, we have compiled a list of figures to help you better understand the particularities of Luxembourg, a truly unique country.
1
There is onlyone Grand Duchy in the world: Luxembourg!
Nevertheless, the country hastwo flagsand we speakthree official languages.
The Luxembourg flagcomprises three colours with three horizontal bands of red, white and sky blue. The Grand Ducal coat of arms displays the following elements: a barruly of argent and azure in ten parts and a lion rampant gules, crowned, armed and langued in gold with a forked tail crossed in saltire. In 2007, following parliamentary intervention, the Government Council declared that the "Red Lion" (Roude Léiw) of the national coat of arms could also be used as a civil flag in Luxembourg.
The majority of Luxembourgers speak fourlanguages. Three languages have the status of official languages: Luxembourgish, French and German. Among several others, these languages are used on a daily basis by the population, making Luxembourg the most multilingual country in Europe.
10
The Grand Duchy hastenUNESCO world heritages!
In 1994, the old district and fortifications of the City of Luxembourg were registered on the list. "The Family of Man" exhibition in Clervaux is part of UNESCO's "Memory of the World" register and the Dancing Procession in Echternach is part of the intangible cultural heritage. In 2020, the organisation added the "Minett UNESCO Biosphere" project in its "Man and the Biosphere" Programme and the "Haupeschbléiser" in the intangible cultural heritage of humanity. In April 2022, theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallofficially became part of the UNESCO network of global geoparks. SInce the end of 2023, transhumance orWanderschéiferei, the traditional method of irrigating pastures,Fléizen, and the midwifery orHiewanskonschtare part of intangible universal heritage inscriptions on the UNESCO list. At the end of 2024, the Art of Dry Stone Walling ord'Konscht vum Dréchemauerbauenis added to the list.
It is worth noting that Luxembourg only hasone cathedral, butmore than1,271 bridgesand100 castles. Withover60 museumsin the country, the Mudam Luxembourg was the most expensive with a construction budget of 90 million euros. The Museum of Contemporary Art was the first major cultural project in Luxembourg; it was built well before the Philharmonie or the Rockhal. Its construction was given the green light in 1989, however the doors finally opened 17 years later...
6,000
The Luxembourg fund industry ended 2021 with close to 6,000 billion under management. These investment funds are marketed in more than 70 countries globally.
Thefinancial centreis one of the key sectors in the country. It is very diversified and offers highly specialised products and services to international clients. Owing to its significant political, economic and social stability, its openness to the world, its specific legal environment and the availability of a highly qualified and multilingual international workforce, the Luxembourg financial centre has become a European hub attracting institutes and investors from across the world.
The Grand Duchy is also the leading market place forsustainable finance.
672,000
672,000 persons live in Luxembourg. Almost half of thepopulationdoes not have Luxembourgish nationality. As well as a cosmopolitan population comprising170 nationalities,about 230,000 cross-border workerscome to work in Luxembourg each day.
Voter participation in Luxembourg is among the highest in Europe. At the last legislativeelectionsin 2023, nearly 90% of the population voted.
Life expectancy at birth is 81 years for men and 85 for women. This high rate is possibly due to a healthy diet. Luxembourgers can not only enjoy local specialities, such asBouneschlupp,KniddelenandFeiersténgszalot, they also havethe highest density ofMichelin-starred restaurantsper inhabitant. There are eight in total!
1,000,000
1.10 million tonnes (Mt) of goods are transported by Cargolux each year.
CargoluxAirlines International S.A. is a Luxembourg-based air freight company with its headquarters and hub located at Luxembourg Airport. The company has a global network of destinations andis one of the largest all-cargo scheduled airlines in Europe.
Without a doubt, Cargolux made the most famous cargo flight in spring 2019, when it became the official transport partner in collaboration withSEA LIFE Trustand its project partner,Whale and Dolphin Conservation(WDC), two transport two beluga whales, Little Grey and Little White, 6,000 miles from China to Iceland.
In general,65% of the goods and services produced in Luxembourg areexported. As a member of the European Union and the Schengen area, the Grand Duchy occupies a strategic position at the heart of Europe. Its dynamic economy is one of the most internationally focused and, according to the Open Markets Index of theICC United Kingdom, is a leader in terms of international competition.
Last update11.04.2025
For more information
Society and culture
Invest
Arts and culture
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/luxembourgers-famous-abroad.html
Top 5: world famous Luxembourgers
The image of the Grand Duchy is nurtured through culture, the economy, advertising campaigns and development strategies. However, above all, it is Luxembourgers who represent their country at home and around the world. In this regard, we would like to introduce you to five successful people who are known across the globe.
World-renowned pianist
Francesco TristanoSchlimé was born in 1981 in Luxembourg. He started to play the piano at the age of five and he gave his first concert at thirteen, playing his own compositions.Today, he is known across the globe in the club scene as well as in classical concert halls.
The composer, producer and performertours as a soloist or part of an ensemble with top orchestras such as theOrchestre national français de LilleortheOrchestre philharmonique du Luxembourg.
His repertoire includes baroque and contemporary music:he composes, produces and records both dance pieces and the complete piano repertoire of Johann Sebastian Bach. Since completing his studies at Juilliard School in New York, he has been fascinated by the flawless beauty of Bach and the rhythmic pulse of techno. He combines the two styles in the concept of "piano 2.0" where the instrument achieves a new textural expression through digital technology.
Francesco Tristanocrafts his albums from personal experiences, which are told through the sensitivity and tonal richness of the piano. For him, music is a form of expression that has no limits in terms of style and time.
Today, thisinternationally renowned concert pianistcollaborates withSony Classicalin order to release his music and still travels the world as both a pianist and an electronic artist.
In 2022, his latest albumOn early musicwas released. And in 2023 he launched his own label,Into the Future. Stay tuned!
Nobel prize winner
Jules Hoffmannwas born in Echternach. in 1941. His father was an entomologist and professor, and opened his eyes to theworld of insectsand nurtured hisinterest in biology. In 1959, at the age of 18, he published his first article on the aquatic heteropterans of Luxembourg in theArchives de l'Institut Grand-ducal de Luxembourg, Section des sciences naturelles, physiques et mathématiques.He continued his studies at the University of Strasbourg, wherehe received a doctorate in experimental biology.
In 1964, he joined theCNRS - Centre national de la recherche scientifiquewhere he created and directed the laboratory Immune response and development in insects.
In 1970, Jules Hoffmann adopted French nationality, a difficult decision at the time but one that was vital in order to pursue a research career. It allowed him to obtain theCNRS gold medal, the highest scientific research award in France.
In 1978, he became the director of the Humoral Biology of Insects laboratory at the CNRS. He also worked at the University of Strasbourg in various institutes and devoted his time to the study of the mechanisms of innate immunity and the expression of the immediate response genes in the vinegar fly, the Toll receptor. In 2011, his research and findings in this field earned him theNobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, together with his two American colleagues, Bruce Beutler from Dallas (Texas) and Ralph Steinman from the Rockefeller Institute in New York.
Jules Hoffmann is currently amember of the Académie des sciences et de l'Académie française. He also holds the Chair of Integrative Biology at the Institute of Advanced Studies of the University of Strasbourg(USIAS).
International designer
Sarah Meyers, together with Laura Fügmann, founded the companyMeyers & Fügmann. They arecreators of textile design and products. They divide their work between Luxembourg and Berlin.
Sarah was born in 1987 in the Grand Duchy and met Laura during her studies at theWeissensee-Kunsthochschulein Berlin. They graduated together from the Sandberg Instituut in Amsterdam having created their work in glass, ceramics, plastic, wood and metal. Since their studies, they work for theJongeriuslab Design Studioin Berlin and started their own company.
A key characteristic of their design process is the voluntary integration of the parameters and states of transformation of the materials during the manufacturing process, i.e.the creative experience and unexpected outcomes form an integral part of their design concept.This "technique" was awarded with theLuxembourg Design Award2017, in the product design category, for their "Couleurs-sur-Sûre" textile, crafted in cooperation with theDuchfabrikof theNaturpark Öewersauer.The blankets are made from regional wool that has been dyed with mostly regional plants and woven in theDuchfabrik.
Vases and other decorative items are always finishedin cooperation with local craftsmen.
Through their designs, Sarah and Laura aim to share their experience, skills and sensibility with the user, as well as a sense of responsibility for their products.
Theircreationsareon sale in boutiques throughout the world(Berlin, Bochum, Eindhoven, Paris, Luxembourg, etc.) and online. Go ahead, spoil yourself!
Managing an international festival
In 1998,Martine Dennewaldvisited theAvignon Festivalwith her mother. This was the moment she realised what she wanted to do with her life:support artists and become the driving force which holds everything together behind the scenes. She studied dramaturgy in Leipzig and completed her Masters in cultural management in London. As no university offers studies in "how to run a festival", Martine learnt through experience.
Born in 1980, she directed theTheaterformeninternational festival which alternates between Hannover and Brunswick in Germany from 2015 to 2020. Prior to that, she worked as a programming director at theKünstlerhaus Mousonturmin Frankfurt and at the "Young Directors Project" of theSalzburg Festival.
In summer 2021, she begins collaborating with Jessie Mill, the co-artistic director of the TransAmériques Festival in Montreal,an international dance and theatre festival. The 16th edition of the festival in 2022, which marks their first collaboration, offers a vibrant and international programme in which artists from 18 countries join local dance and theatre groups. Martine Dennewald and Jessie Mill are committed to promotingworks based on dialogue, sharing and open-mindedness.
Martine's desire to communicate freely with artists led her to learn eight languages! These language skills will definitely come in handy during her time at the helm of the Montreal festival, where she would like toexplore what connects performing arts in Quebec and around the world, as well as contribute to sparking an artistic debate between the three Americas, and establish an inclusive and egalitarian visionof the movement of works and artists.
We look forward to the outcome... the stage is hers!
Touchdown!
Damon Johanns is 19 years old; he is anAmerican football player who plays his trade with the Missouri Tigers at the University of Missouri in the United States.
But football was not his first passion. At the age of two, he would pick up a ball and put it in every basket he found. His father, Patrick Johanns, a basketball player in Luxembourg believed that his son would follow in his footsteps. When the Grand Duchy's national basketball team asked him to join them for the European U16 and U20 championships, he declined as American football already held him firmly in its grasp! Friends convinced Damon to try out for the local high school team, Helias Catholic High School - Jefferson City, and he soon caught the eye of the team's trainers.
Despite missing two games through injury, Damon played a key role in the 2020 State Championship. His team, the Crusaders, ended the season unbeaten, with 505 yards and eighttouchdowns. Subsequently, the trainer of the Missouri Tigers, a key player in college sports, sent Damon a message to say he had a place for him in the team.It was a dream come true and Damon announced his arrival at Mizzou on 2 February 2021.
Patrick Johanns and Audrey Kauffman, Damon's American-born mother, moved to the USA in 2002. Damon has dual Luxembourgish-American nationality. The connection with the Grand Duchy remains strong through regular visits. Damon is the great-grandson of former Luxembourg cycling champion Pierre Clemens!
The stadium of the Tigers has a capacity of 65,000. Besides Damon Johanns, the team has half a dozen othertight-ends. Damon is studying financial management and remains realistic about his football career, as the competition is immense. We will keep our eyes on the ball across the Atlantic and hope to see a Luxembourger in the National Football League soon!
Last update11.04.2025
For more information
Artistic creation
Innovation
Sports
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/musikvereine-luxemburg.html
Luxembourg’s music associations – where the community is in time.
The conductor raises his baton and the musicians in the hall bring their wind instruments to their lips, and moments later, fill the room with sound. This scene plays out weekly when thefanfares, music groupsand'harmonies'come together to rehearse. This is the name given to the brass and music bands that liven up Luxembourg’s villages and towns. It’s impossible to imagine public life without the country’s music associations, whether they are local brass bands, orchestras or choirs. Here, people of all backgrounds meet after work to indulge in their passion: making music. These associations are supported by theUnion Grand-Duc Adolphe(UGDA), one of Luxembourg’s oldest federations, which offers many other activities.
An integral part of society
Anyone who attends Luxembourg’s festivals, strolls through public squares in the summer, or plays an instrument themselves will have already noticed:almost every village in Luxembourg is home to a music association. There are often even several of them, some of which have existed formore than 100 yearsand which still animate village life and inspire a new generation.
These associations are firmly rooted in their communities and are incredibly diverse. Here, office workers meet farmers, teenagers meet pensioners, and many a newcomer has made their first social contacts with the locals. This makes them an important part of the cultural and social fabric of the villages and towns, and makes them a vector for integration in Luxembourg society. Not only do new members always find a warm welcome, butmany music and cultural associations of Luxembourg’s international communities also enrich this environment. ​
TheUnion Grand-Duc Adolphe (UGDA)has been promoting this enthusiasm for 157 years. As the umbrella organisation of all music associations in the country, it represents more than 12,500 members and almost 300 associations, including brass bands, choirs, folklore and theatre groups.
One of the tasks of the UGDA is tosupport exchanges between the associations, as well as to facilitate international cooperation and travel. For example, it organises a whole series oftraining courses, concerts and competitionsin a wide variety of fields, and thus actively supports the life of the association.
International connections
The UGDA maintains close relations with federations from other countries, which leads to regular exchanges. For example, UGDA music school’sNational Youth Wind Orchestra Luxembourgplays concerts every year, including abroad.
More info and concert dateson their Facebook page.
A broad offer for aspiring musicians
Above all, the UGDA offers easy access to music, witha total of55 music schoolsspread across Luxembourg. These local institutions aredirect route into the world of music for many children, and they also provide an easy entry point for adults who are (re)discovering their love of music. The courses are held locally and are therefore particularly accessible; they are organised in cooperation with the municipalities, which also provide the rooms.
About 6,000 students are currently enrolled in courses, i.e. around 1% of the total population.What makes these courses so successful?Most certainly theeasy access and the many competitions and training courses, as well as the quality of the teaching, because all teachers are trained music educators. In addition, many courses take place in close coordination and cooperation with the local clubs – so whoever enrols has many opportunities to actively participate in local club life within a short time.
Did you know?
Residents as well as non-resident workers’ families are entitled tochildcare vouchers(Chèques service accueil, CSA) in Luxembourg. The vouchers can be used for awide range of childcare services, as well as activities in clubs for children aged 0-12,includingmusic schools and UGDA courses.
Preserving the musical heritage
In addition, the UGDA iscommitted to the preservation of musical heritage: the documentation centre collects, bundles and publishesworks by Luxembourg artists and composersin the various musical fields.
However,the musical heritage of the country is lived every day through the associations: they are wherever people come together. This is of course the case at many public and private celebrations, as well as on ceremonial occasions and at smaller festivals. So if you’re strolling through a local market, or on a warm evening in a public square, aband or choir is bound to be brightening up the moment with a musical performance.  On national holidays or on important church or social occasions, artistic background music is just as much a part of the occasion.
And of course at the'Kirmes' fair - a traditional date in every village. Not only do they play at the festival itself, but the brass bands also parade through the villages on weekends, playing music to announce the event and collect donations The same song, theHämmelsmarsch(mutton march) – a traditional march based on a folk tune – is played over and over again. If the donation is more generous, or the homeowner donate drinks, the waltzT’ass Kiermes am Duerf(It’s fair time in the village), or a flourish is also played to the donor, before the procession continues its way.
These moments unite everyone around a common goal:to give the listeners and spectators a good time and also to have a pleasant moment together themselves as an association.
​
Last update11.04.2025
For more information
An open and cosmopolitan society
Dance in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/emigration-immigration.html
Thriving through migration
Did you know that 47.4% of Luxembourg's population have a foreign nationality? While Luxembourg undoubtedly has one of the highest ratios of foreign nationals, it is also true that we do not only manage to integrate people from other cultures, we also have learned how to prosper together with those from other countries and cultures who wish to live here. This has come to be an integral part of the openness and cosmopolitan flair Luxembourg is famous for.
A haven for people from all parts of the world
Luxembourg'sratio of foreigners has been on the rise for the past 70 years. While only 13.2% of the resident population did not have the Luxembourg nationality in 1961, we are talking about47.4% as of 2020 – nearly half the population.
The reasons for this are manifold:
Economic opportunities: Luxembourg is without doubt the economic powerhouse of the Greater Region and aninternationally confirmed financial hotspoton the European continent.Luxembourg's thriving economy is a major argumentfor many foreign nationals to live in the country.
A European capital: Along with Brussels and Strasbourg,Luxembourg City isone of the three European capitals. Some 14,000 European civil servants now live and work in one of the EU's many institutions that are located here, and many activities have sprung up around these institutions.
High quality of life: Despite the fast economic development of the past 60 years, Luxembourg hasconserved an intact natural beauty, and much more. The country's health insurance and social security systems, its high quality infrastructures and the government's support for families has led toone of the world's highestquality of life standards.
Multilingual environment: When so many people from all parts of the world come together, communication is key.Luxembourg's population has always beenmultilingual, making it easy for foreigners to take part in an open and welcoming society.
Did you know?
The biggest foreign communities are, in order, the Portuguese (92,101 individuals), French (49,104), Italian (24,676), Belgian (19,205) and German (12,678) communities. Chinese number some 4,300 and US citizens a little bit over 2,600 people.
(Source: Statec figures as of 1st January 2023)
All of this has contributed to a steady stream of migration towards Luxembourg and, more recently, the Greater Region, as housing prices have sensibly risen in the Grand Duchy.
Right now, people form195 nationalities live together in Luxembourg, in total some 313,407 individuals (Source: Statec figures as of 1st January 2023). Moreover, 221.595 cross-border employees travel to Luxembourg every day (Source: Statec figures for Q4 2019) –Luxembourg is the perfect example of a functioning borderless Europe.
From emigration to immigration
Luxembourg has not always been a haven for migration. Indeed,the country's past is marked by waves of emigration. Before the rise of the steel industry in the mid-19th century, Luxembourg was a poor and rural country. Driven by the hope of carving out a better life elsewhere, numerous inhabitants left their homeland.
In the 12th and 18th centuries, a wave of emigration ledLuxembourgers to Transylvania and Banat, respectively.Traces of this can still be found in the Romanian city of Sibiu, which partnered with Luxembourg City in 2007 for the European Capital of Culture.
In the course of the19th century and until theFirst World War, there was a strong trend in the country towardsoverseas emigration(USA, Brazil, Argentina, etc.). Others went to France to work as artisans or, in the case of young girls, as maids and house-keepers. The number of Luxembourgers who left the country between 1841 and 1891 is thought to be more than 72,000 (out of a total population of 212,800 inhabitants in 1891).
Entire families and sometimes entire villages left Luxembourgin the hopes of finding a better life. As an example, 16,000 Luxembourg emigrants were living in Chicago in 1908. Some became famous in their new homeland, such asHugo Gernsback(1884-1967), the inventor of the term 'science fiction', orEdward Steichen, a painter and famous photographer, who became Director of the Department of Photography in the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA).
After the rise of the steel industry in the second half of the 19th century, the tide turned, and successive waves of Germans, Italians, Portuguese and other nationals have come to Luxembourg to work and live here.
More information on the official website of Luxembourg's statistics office:
Get all the information about immigrating to Luxembourg here:
Last update11.04.2025
For more information
An open and cosmopolitan society
The Schengen Agreements – dreaming a Europe without borders
Quality of life
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/genealogy.html
Genealogy – find your Luxembourgish ancestors
Would you like to explore your descendance and understand your family history? In Luxembourg, genealogical research is facilitated by a large number of archives and even electronic sources compiling recent and historical documents on the population in the Grand Duchy. So do not hesitate to immerse yourself into the search of your Luxembourgish roots!
A wealth of information sources
A wide rangeof research optionsandarchivescan be consulted for the purpose of genealogical research: National and municipal archives, church archives, as well as the archives of border regions of neighbouring countries. Genealogy associations can also help you in your endeavours.
National archives and municipal archives
TheNational Archives(ANLux) bring together the largest number of Luxembourg's registers in their repositories, so they are an excellent place to start your genealogical research.Certificates of the Civil Registrar of the District Courts of Luxembourg and Diekirchfrom 1795 to 1912 can be accessed from their website. They can be consulted via thesearch engine known asQuery. The National Archives offer genealogy coursesfor newbies and enthusiasts, to teach them palaeography and archive research basics.
Municipalitiesalso have archives that can be accessed. You can contact themunicipal administrationwhere you would like to look for your ancestors to gain access to the archives.
Diocesan archives
Diocesan archivesare another accessible source for genealogical research. They includebirth, marriage and death registers. Registers can alsobe accessed online on theMatriculaportal. They consolidate over 170.000 digital files from the catholicity register of the 17th and 20th century.
Other archives
If you are looking for individuals or families who lived in the confines of the former Grand Duchy of Luxembourg on territories that are now in France or Germany, or in the Western part of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (now the province of Luxembourg in Belgium), visiting theState Archives of Arlon, theDepartmental Archives of the Moselleor theCentral State Archive of Coblenzcan prove fertile.
Associations of genealogy
Genealogy lovers can also find information or get help by contacting or joining agenealogy club. In Luxembourg, there are several not-for-profit associations of genealogy and local history, such asluxroots.clubandluxracines. In Wallonia, the not-for-profit associationGéniWal('Généalogie Informatique Wallonie' or Computing Genealogy Wallonia) can provide assistance to those seeking their ancestors on former Luxembourgish territory.
Major population flows
The historyof Luxembourg and its population is characterised bymigration flows and moving borders.In 1659, certain territories were surrendered to France, and in 1815, Prussia took over Luxembourg's territory. As part of the 1839 Treaty of London, a Western part of theterritory was given to Belgium. In addition to these territorial changes, the population went through asignificant wave of emigrationto the American continent and France in the 19th century, when families left the country in the hope of a better life elsewhere.
Last update12.03.2026
For more information
An open and cosmopolitan society
Arts and culture
Regions
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/7-things-not-to-do-when-youre-invited-for-dinner.html
7 things you need to know when you're invited for dinner in Luxembourg
Cultural codes can sometimes be tricky to understand. While this may be less the case in Luxembourg, with its many cultural influences, it may still come in handy to know the basics when you've been invited by your Luxembourgish friends. So, here are seven things ou ought to do (or not, as it may be) in Luxembourg when you're turning up for dinner.
If you have recently moved to Luxembourg, and haven't been invited yet, do not despair.Luxembourgers are very friendly and welcoming to outsiders, but it might take some time for them to warm up to you and invite you over for dinner. If they do,consider it an honour.
Luxembourgers are easygoing, especially at informal get-togethers. So, here's our list of the top things to do - or not to do when you've been invited for dinner.
Don't leave your hosts waiting
Luxembourgers do not like to be kept waiting. Evening dinners usually start at arount 8 p.m., although that is not a strict rule of course. In any case, be punctual, as turning up late may brand you as unreliable, not to speak of the hosts' carefully laid-out dinner plans that you just ruined. Arriving up to a quarter of an hour late will be judged acceptable (the famousquart d'heure académique, the academic fifteen minutes), butarriving any later than that without having called in advance will be considered – well, inconsiderate.
A little something will go a long way
It is usual for invitees to bring a gift for the hosts,usually a flower bouquet or a good bottle of wine, if it's a formal dinner invitation. For a movie evening, some snacks and beer will be more adapted, but abottle of sparklingCrémantwill always be welcome. If you are looking for some inspiration, check out our article aboutwines in Luxembourg.
If your gift is set aside for the time being, don't be offended.Gifts are usually not opened in the presence of the guests, especially when many are present. Instead, the host(s) will take great pleasure to open them after the guests are gone.
The 3-kisses rule
If you are invited to a private get-together at someone's house,the 3 cheek-kisses are customary between women, and between women and men as a greeting. Men greet each other with a firm handshake – although, make sure you get the difference between 'firm' and 'crushing'. The latter is seen as extremely impolite. Since the pandemic however, handshakes or fist bumps have become acceptable as well.
Respect your hosts' privacy
Nobody likes people nosing around, especially Luxembourgers, who value their privacy. Making comments about stylish dining room furniture is going to make your hosts beam. Making the same kind of comments about the bedroom furniture is not. House-warming parties might be the exception to the rule here.
Show good table manners
Mind your table manners!Luxembourgers are very sensitive when it comes to bad table manners. So, keep your elbows off the table and don't gulp that wine down in one go, never mind how good it is.
Enjoy your time and don't rush
Dinner usually starts with a glass ofCrémantand somehors d'oeuvres, followed by the actual meal, which can be anything from a main course and dessert meal to a 5-course traditional LuxembourgishKiermes-meal. In any event, plan enough time.Luxembourgers enjoy being together andschnëssen(chatting), and it is not unknown for even a small informal get-together to last several hours.
Don't overdo the drinking
In all probability, your hosts will have put quite a bit of thought into which drinks to serve, from theCrémantat the apéritif, via the wine(s) and up to the spirits at the digestif. Politely refusing alcohol will lead to you being offered alternatives, so don't be afraid to decline alcohol if you don't feel like drinking. Indeed,because of the strict laws against DUI, many invitees will stick to one glass of wine over dinner, and spirits are only occasionally served these days. If they are, LuxembourgishDrëppen(fruit brandies) are just as popular as Cognac, Whisky, Limoncello or a Grappa. The country's international openness translates into the choice of spirits.
In any way,don't overdo the drinking – you might get away with being tipsy, but being stone drunk is going to seriously ruin your reputation and your host's evening.
So, this is our advice to a successful evening at a Luxembourgish dinner. As for the food, rest assured that Luxembourgers love good food and if an actual dinner is being prepared, most will go to great lengths to treat you to something special.
Last update11.04.2025
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Luxembourg's flavours
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/foundation-grand-duke-grand-duchess.html
The Grand Duke and Grand Duchess Foundation - supporting inclusion and integration
TheFondation du Grand-Duc et de la Grande-Duchessewas set up in 1981, when the royal couple got married. Its focus has always been to encourage integration and inclusion. The foundation's Board of Directors is chaired by HRH the Grand Duchess.
In Luxembourg, as in many countries,social exclusion undermines the very fabric of society, and it is vital to tackle the issue as a priority. The reasons for exclusion can be many and varied, from difficulties finding housing or employment to disability. The Grand Duke and Grand Duchess Foundation aims to address all forms of social exclusion by providingprompt and effective moral and/or financial support, working in conjunction with other players in the sector.
The foundation is also committed to helping victims of sexual violence, especially during armed conflict.The "Stand, Speak, Rise Up" conference, initiated and organised by HRH the Grand Duchess in March 2019, helped raise awareness among the general public in Luxembourg and elsewhere of the atrocities experienced by victims of sexual violence.
Individual social assistance – support without bureaucracy
Luxembourg has a highly developed social security network, based on the combined efforts of stakeholders in several sectors, to ensure that those members of society most in need receive appropriate protection. By providing individual social assistance, the foundation serves as a link in this chain.
The social assistance provided by the foundation is aimed at individuals with difficulties or disabilities. The foundation gets involved in areas where other public institutions are no longer able to act, or in cases when time is of the essence and state aid cannot be arranged quickly enough.
In other words, the foundation reaches out to people who cannot find the help they need elsewhere, offering rapid support in various forms.
Financial assistance is a key area of the foundation's work.It can cover everyday expenses such as electricity or heating bills, medical or treatment costs or school expenses. But the foundation also acts in other ways, such asredirecting individuals to the relevant people or organisations, providing comprehensive psychosocial support or offering basic advice and solutions (for example resolving a difficult financial situation).
The most important thing is to provide those asking for help with a friendly ear and genuine support via the foundation's services, and to make sure they receive swift, appropriate assistance.
Tackling sexual violence
Of the many beneficiaries of the foundation's work,single mothers are particularly at risk. They often live in unstable circumstances and may have suffered domestic violence and sexual or psychological abuse.Tackling this abuse is a priority for the foundation.
The foundation does not only work within Luxembourg's borders; it also strives tohelp people in need via humanitarian projects elsewhere in the world. Tackling the problem of sexual violence as a weapon of war has become a particular priority, culminating in the"Stand, Speak, Rise Up" conference organised by HRH the Grand Duchessin March 2019. The conference in Luxembourg was attended by some50 survivors of sexual violencefrom 18 countries. Participants also includedNobel Peace Prize laureate Dr Denis Mukwege, known for his work to help women who have experienced sexual abuse.
At the end of the conference, three agreements were signed. Two of these were to extend and electrifyPanzi Hospital in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
The hospital is based in Bukavu, a Congolese city on the Rwandan border. It has 450 beds and specialises intreating gynaecological conditions, including those caused by sexual violence. Directed by Dr Mukwege, the hospital has developed a specific treatment system for victims of sexual violence which not only addresses physical injuries but also includes psychological support, legal aid and socio-economic reintegration.
The third agreement provides forfinancial support for the NGO "We are NOT Weapons of War", to help develop the mobile application BackUp, which aims to establish a reliable database to analyse the phenomenon of conflict-related sexual violence and offer an appropriate response to the needs of survivors.
Last update11.04.2025
For more information
The Grand Duke
An open and cosmopolitan society
Social security
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population/demographics.html
An open and cosmopolitan society
Today, Luxembourg has a population of 672,050 people with an incredible diversity. In fact, almost 47.3% of the population doesn't have Luxembourgish nationality! And this does not even take into account the 228,400 cross-border commuters who work in Luxembourg. This mix of languages and cultures from all these communities is rewarding for life in Luxembourg and gives it a cosmopolitan characteristic.
Key figures
On 1st January 2024,672,050 people lived in Luxembourg, which has a total area of 2,586 km2. This means an average of 260 inhabitants per km2. This means that it'sone of the most densely populated regions of Europe(EU:108). In the Grand Duchy, the city of Luxembourg (134,700 inhabitants) and the town of Esch-sur-Alzette (37,500 inhabitants) are the most populous. Are you looking for a more rural and peaceful setting away from urban centres? The municipalities of Saeul, Wahl, Putscheid and Grosbous in the west and north of the country are the least populated.
In 2023,the total population increased by 11,241; a big part of the population growth is the result of international migration! 11,904 persons acquired Luxembourgish nationality through naturalisation in 2023.
Life expectancyat birth is 81 years for men and 85 for women.
Nationalities in Luxembourg
Take a stroll in any street of a Luxembourgish town or city and you will hear it: Luxembourg hostslarge foreign communities, including descendants of 19th and 20th century migrants, expats, and people who decided to stay following a visit to the Grand Duchy. Overall,47.3% – almost half – of the population is made up foreigners.170 nationalitieshave been currently recorded across the country. Foreigners account for 70.8% of Luxembourg city's population.
Moreover, each working dayaround 228,400 cross-border commutersjourney to Luxembourg from France, Germany and Belgium to work and contribute to the country's wealth. It therefore does not come as a surprise that people order their lunch in French or contact a company in German.
And if you don't speak one of these languages, you will almost be able to find someone to help you in your language...Long livemultilingualism!
Here is a list of Luxembourg's5 largest foreign communities in Luxembourg, as a percentage of the total population:
In terms of the proportion of foreigners in the population, the city of Luxembourg has the highest number of foreigners with 70.8%, followed by Strassen (62.3%) and Larochette (58.3%). The communes of Wahl (20.4%), Useldange (21.3%), Reckange-sur-Mess (21.7%) and Goesdorf (21.7%) have the lowest proportion of foreigners.
In 2023,11,904 people gained Luxembourgish nationality, through naturalisation, option or re-acquisition.
From an emigration country to a land of opportunity
How did we get to this point?For a long time, Luxembourg has witnessed waves of emigration. Some of its population left their land and homes in waves to Romania, the United States and Brazil, before theeconomic boom triggered by the steel industrycaused the tide to turn.
Entire families and sometimes entire villages left the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in the hope of finding a better life. Thus, there were 16,000 Luxembourgish emigrants living in Chicago in 1908! Some became famous in their new homeland, such as  Hugo Gernsback  (1884-1967), who coined the term 'science fiction', orEdward Steichen, a painter and famous photographer, who became Director of the Department of Photography in the New York Museum of Modern Art (MoMA).
From the second half of the 19th century, Germans settled in Luxembourg to work in the country's steel mills, followed by the Italians in the 20th century. In the 1960s,thousands of Portuguese fled the dictatorship and poverty and moved to Luxembourg.
In the second half of the 20th century, the service sector grew, especially the finance sector. This new economic boom was linked to thegrowth of French, Belgian and German communitiesin Luxembourg, but Luxembourg also attracted a large number ofnationals from the British Isles and Scandinavian countries, who settled in the Grand Duchy to work.
As the years went by,these communities integrated into Luxembourg's population, even if they kept some of their customs and languages.
Last update11.04.2025
For more information
Equal opportunities
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Living
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/luxembourg-musees-militaires-guerre-mondiale.html
Top 5: museums for understanding our shared history
Although Luxembourg has experienced its share of troubled times and periods of conflict throughout the centuries, its museums focus in particular on the history and events of the Second World War. They cover the Nazi occupation, deportations and the resistance, the Battle of the Bulge and Luxembourg’s liberation, making the country a top destination for historical tourism. Through their collections, these museums strive to preserve their historic heritage and pay tribute to the stories they now host. Take a look at our pick below.
National Museum of Resistance (Esch-sur-Alzette)
The Second World War had a profound impact on Luxembourg and irrevocably changed the course of its history. Visiting theNational Museum of Resistance and Human Rights (MNRDH)is one of the best ways of understanding thiskey event in the country’s past. The museum – opened in 1956 and modernised in 2024 – reminds visitors of their duty to remember, ensuring the historic events of the war will never be forgotten.
In itspermanent exhibition, which covers two floors, the museumretraces the Nazi occupation and deportations and the resistance through contemporary objects, archive documents and personal accounts. From the very first exhibit, the authenticity is striking. Displayed items include prisoners’ possessions such as shoes, spectacles, combs, letters, cookware and utensils, whilea concentration camp hutbrings even more profound insight into the reality prisoners faced. A visit is highly recommended to ensure that history – and its lessons – are not forgotten.
Battle of the Bulge Museum (Wiltz and Clervaux)
To better understand theBattle of the Bulge, immerse yourself in the exhibitions at themuseums in Wiltzand Clervaux.
The tank guarding the entrance to the magnificentClervaux Castlesets the tone. Here, the memory of the war lives on, drawing visitors into the heart of military history. With a vast collection that belies its small size, the museum transports visitors back in time tothe winter of 1944-1945 to tell the story of the Battle of the Bulge. This dark period, which lasted for almost two months, is brought to life through a wide-ranging collection of documents, uniforms, authentic weapons and striking dioramas recreating scenes from the battle.
Opened in 1970, theMuseum of the Battle of the Bulge in Wiltz also commemorates the German offensive in the Ardennes and the town’s liberationby American troops. A staggering number of the items on display illustrate the lives of soldiers and civilians, while memorable moments such as the resistance, the defence of the town and life alongside American soldiers also feature prominently. More tragically, visitors will also relive the terrible destruction of Wiltz, which earned it its name of theCité Martyre– the Martyr Town.
Deportation Memorial Museum (Luxembourg City)
TheDeportation Memorial Museumis a place of remembrance of Luxembourg’s history during the Second World War. It was here, atthe old Hollerich railway station, that young Luxembourgers were deported to Germany after being forcibly conscripted into the German army. The station was also where the fate of Luxembourg’s Jewish community was sealed whendeportations to the ghettos and death camps began. Today, it is home to a small museum, in which an exhibition on what befell the young conscripts and the Jewish people deported from the station was installed in the 1990s.
National Museum of Military History (Diekirch)
At just €5, a ticket to theNational Museum of Military History in Diekirchis an excellent investment. For this modest sum, you find yourself at the very heart of military history, discovering the Battle of the Bulge in Luxembourg during the winter of 1944‑1945, surrounded bymore than 100,000 pieces displayed over some 3,000m2. The museum houses a vastcollection of weapons, vehicles of all kinds, uniforms, photosand soldiers’ personal items.
As you travel back to the time of the war, immerse yourself insoldiers’ daily realities through life-sized dioramasfrom amidst the battle, offering a faithful insight into their everyday lives and their experiences of the front.
With realistic reconstructions and authentic exhibits,the museum also chronicles the First World War and theKorean War. Part of the museum also covers the history of theLuxembourg Army.
General Patton Memorial Museum (Ettelbruck)
Even the outside of theGeneral Patton Memorial Museumproclaims the history contained within its walls. A portrait of the general is in pride of place and his name is emblazoned over the entrance. It’s clear at a glance thatthe museum is a tribute to GeneralGeorge S. Patton Jr., commander of the Third United States Army, who liberated the town of Ettelbruck in December 1944.
As soon as you cross the threshold, you feel the breath of history on your face and your eye immediately falls on theimposing statue of General Patton. Every item carries whispers of stories from the past.
Aunique collection of tanks, military vehicles and artillery pieces, uniforms, helmets and personal itemssurrounds visitors at each step. The museum also features a reconstruction of General Patton’s desk, adorned with strategic maps and battlefield photos.Experience the campaigns and battles of the Second World War through photos and films, while the sounds of explosions and bombardments only add to the realism. It’s a fascinating, accessible and genuinely unforgettable visit.
Last update04.03.2026
For more information
Battle of the Bulge: War rears its ugly head one last time in Luxembourg
The Second World War
First World War
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/archeologie-dinosaures-romains-celtes-loschbour.html
Luxembourg: fertile ground for archaeological discoveries
Luxembourg is a site of multiple archaeological discoveries that bear witness to its complex history. With every find, the earth reveals a new fragment of the past. Pieces of pottery, coins, tools, dinosaur fossils, and even the remains of entire houses and villages from past civilisations are regularly unearthed in Luxembourg, illustrating the country's rich archaeological heritage.
The Man from Loschbour
One of the most significant discoveries was the"Loschbourman", a prehistoric hunter-gatherer whose bones were discovered by teacher and amateur archaeologist Nicolas Thill in 1935 under a rock in the Mullerthal. Research has revealed that the man lived in the late Mesolithic period, around 8,000 years ago. TheLoschbour mannever touched a smartphone, but his DNA can tell us much more than a selfie. Thanks to the latest progress in genetics, we know thathe was around 1.60m tall, he was stocky, weighed around 60kg and had dark skin, dark hair and... blue eyes. His skeleton is currently on display at theNational Museum of Natural History.
But the science also revealed that he is not the oldest human to have been found in Luxembourg. The cremated remains of a woman discovered nearby were dated to even earlier, around a thousand years before the Loschbour man.
The Loschbour man – anthropological analysis (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg in the dinosaur age
Our journey back in time does not stop in the Mesolithic era. If we go back even further, we reach an ancient period that came to prominence with the filmJurassic Park. In the Jurassic era, much of what is present-day Luxembourg was covered by sea, including the south of the country, the Minett. It was here thatin 2017, archaeologists unearthed a plesiosaur, a marine reptile that lived 185 million years ago. As such specimens are very rare, the fossil is considered to beone of the most spectacular palaeontological discoveries ever made in Luxembourg.
And it doesn't stop there. In March 2025,the remains of huge scaly amphibians known aslabyrinthodonts, dating from the Triassic period, were uncovered around Larochette. Around a hundred bones were unearthed, dating from around 210 million years ago. These amphibians were among the largest predators of their time and they lived like today's crocodiles.
When it comes to dinosaurs themselves, the first officially recognised discovery in Luxembourg was made in Brouch in 2014. Palaeontologists found a tooth and a toe phalanx belonging to carnivorous Jurassic dinosaurs who lived here around 200 million years ago.
Trouvailles archéologiques
Fossil remains of a crested newt (Panzerlurch), an armoured amphibian from the Triassic period.
© Ben Thuy (MNHNL)
Roman villa in Echternach
© MECO (ministère de l'Économie)
Plesiosaur fossil discovered in Luxembourg.
© Eric Threinen
Discovery of a Roman treasure and fortified building in Hosingen Park.
© C. Nosbusch / INRA (Institut national de recherches archéologiques)
Phalanx of a Neotheropoda discovered in Brouch, evidence of the region's prehistoric past.
© Biller Paul Braun (MNHNL)
Tooth of a Neotheropoda discovered in Brouch, remnant of a predator from the region's prehistoric past.
© Paul Braun (MNHNL)
Plesiosaur fossil discovered in Luxembourg, evidence of the region's prehistoric marine fauna.
© Eric Threinen
Workers at the archaeological excavation site of the ‘Knuedler’. The work has uncovered the remains of the former Franciscan Cordeliers convent, once located on the site of the present-day Place Guillaume II.
© 2014 MCULT
The amphitheatre at the Dalheim archaeological site
© ORT Moselle (Office régional du tourisme Région Moselle)
Treasures from the Romans and the Celts
Several million years later, we come to the first human civilisations – and the finds in Luxembourg are no longer just individual prehistoric creatures but the remains of organised societies, especially those of theCelts, whose traces we can find on theTitelberg plateau.Here a hugeoppidum(Iron Age settlement) stretching over more than 50 hectares, dating back to the 1st century BCE and protected by nearly 3km of ramparts, has been discovered. After Julius Caesar's conquest of Gaul, Titelberg became part of the Roman Empire.
And the Roman presence can be found elsewhere in Luxembourg:in Dalheim, the remains of the Vicus Ricciacumalso illustrate the lasting legacy of the Romans in the region. The 35-hectare site included housing, public spaces, temples and baths. Researchers have also discovered a nearby Gallo-Roman theatre that could house almost 3,500 spectators.
In December 2024, one of the most important Roman discoveries was made inHolzthum: 141 remarkable gold coinsdating from the late 4th century and representing eight Roman emperors who reigned between 364 and 408 CE.
Another treasure, a historical one this time, is theRoman villa in Echternach, one of the most impressive archaeological sites in Luxembourg. Built around 70 CE, this was originally a palatial residence over two floors, with marble walls and mosaic floors, together with an under-floor heating system.
The Vichten mosaic
The Vichten mosaic is the most remarkable Roman find ever unearthed in Luxembourg. The mosaic, discovered in 1994 on a farm in the small village of Vichten, was a decorative floor covering in an important villa dating back to the 3rd century CE. It is currently on display in theNational Museum of Archaeology, History and Art (MNAHA)and is in excellent condition. The 60-square-metre mosaic represents the nine Muses in Greek mythology, including Calliope in the centre, accompanied by Homer. A copy of the ornate stone creation can be found in Vichten, between the church and the community centre.
Middle Ages
After the fall of the Roman Empire, the Franks came to what is now Luxembourg during the Early Middle Ages (5th to 8th centuries). Some of the most significant archaeological discoveries from this period testify to the lives of the Franks during the Merovingian dynasty, as reflected in theTelpeschholzgraves in Dondelange and those in Clemency, Schengen and Dalheim.Archaeologists have unearthed skeletons as well as offerings such as weapons, jewellery and everyday items on these sites. Other Frankish graves have been excavated in Echternach, Mamer, Beringen, Schieren and Bech.
As the Franks settled in the region, Christianity spread and the first churches and abbeys appeared. Archaeological digs in 2014 revealed the growing religious influence, with the unearthing ofremains of a Franciscan monastery and mediaeval cemetery under Rue du Fossé in Luxembourg City.A surrounding wall, around twenty tombs and an ossuary were revealed.
During the same excavations, asilver-alloy coin dating from the 10th century, struck during the reign of Henry the Fowler, King of East Francia and Lotharingia between 919 and 936, was discovered. The coin, which may have been in circulation until the 12th century, dates from the same period as the building of Lucilinburhuc castle by Count Siegfried (922-998) in around 963.
This emblematic castle, considered as the birthplace of today's Luxembourg, marked the country's entry into the feudal era and the construction of the first major fortifications. The many monuments dating from this period include the seven castles in the Eisch Valley, known as theValley of the Seven Castles. In 2025, in Hollenfels – home to one of the seven castles –, a moat surrounding the fortress andthe remains of a stone bridge were discovered, offering a glimpse into mediaeval life and the defensive architecture of the time.
Countless mediaeval discoveries in Luxembourg bear witness to daily life and fortified architecture in the Middle Ages. These traces of the past, often buried beneath our feet for centuries, are still being uncovered today.
Last update24.02.2026
For more information
Luxembourg's origins
400 years of foreign sovereigns
At the helm of the Holy Roman Empire
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/commemoration-journee-lieux-symbole-souvenir-guerre-mondiale.html
Tribute to those who will never be forgotten
Every year in October, Luxembourg celebrates National Remembrance Day.  It pays tribute to all those who lost their lives in the Second World War.​ But beyond that, it serves as a reminder of the struggle waged by the Luxembourgish people against German occupation between 1940 and 1945. ​ However, this day is not the only one dedicated to the darkest chapter in Luxembourg's history.  Throughout the year, numerous commemorative events take place across the country.
National Remembrance Day is certainly the most significant of the commemorative ceremonies, but it is not the only one to honour the memory of the past. ​There are no fewer than 25 national commemorative days related to the Second World War.They remind us of the importance of never forgetting the suffering endured by the people of Luxembourg. ​ Some commemorations are linked to the Holocaust, others to the Resistance, the German invasion, General Strike Day, the Battle of the Bulge, or the liberation of the Grand Duchy. ​
American military cemetery in Hamm
Not far from the centre of Luxembourg, in the district of Hamm, lies the American Military Cemetery. Surrounded by trees and immaculately maintained lawns, it contains the remains of 5,076 American soldiers who fell during the Second World War, mainly during theBattle of the Bulge. ​
Their white crosses, lined up like an army at attention, form a semicircle around a memorial chapel,at the centre of which lies the grave ofGeneral George S. Patton. ​Wreaths are laid there each year during theMemorial Dayceremony, held in May.
National Remembrance Day
On National Remembrance Day, several ceremonies take place in the capital at the following places of remembrance:
Schumann's Eck Memorial
In the same spirit of remembrance, another site commemorates the fighting duringthe Battle of the Bulge in the winter of 1944–45: the Schuman's Eck Memorial. Once astrategic crossroads contested between Allied and German forces, the Schumann Corner now pays tribute to the soldiers and civilians who fell during the fierce fighting in the wooded hills of the Oesling region.​ It should be noted that Schumann’s Eck,located at the crossroads of Ettelbruck, Wiltz and Bastogne, is not a single monument but a collection of memorial sites scattered around the junction, includingthe National Liberation Memorialand its commemorative plaques,the Massegraf(mass grave), the ruined house and the Sentier de Mémoire 1944–1945 (Memory Trail 1944–1945).​
National Memorial to the General Strike in Wiltz
In 1942, the town of Wiltz became the scene of a tragic chapter in Luxembourg's history: This is wherethe national general strike against compulsory military service in the Wehrmachtbegan. The strike quickly spread to other towns in the country, such as Schifflange, Differdange and Esch-sur-Alzette, much to the displeasure ofthe German occupiers, who retaliated by executing 21 Luxembourgers.
Today,a 23-metre-high monument in the shape of a lighthousecommemorates the victims of the general strike. Every year on 31 August, a commemorative ceremony is held in honour of the victims, whose names are engraved in the monument's crypt.
Monument to aviators in Maulusmühle
It is 21 March 1945. In the distance, we can hear the roar ofa British aircraft, a Hudson FK803, flying over the forests of the Oesling. The twin-engine Royal Air Force aircraft battles through clouds and storm. ​ After a futile struggle against the forces of nature,it crashes in the Maulusmühle forest.​ Six people perished in the flames of the explosion. ​ According to some reports, the pilot was the sole survivor of the tragedy.​
Today, the forest has reclaimed its rights, mosses and ferns have taken back possession of the area.Only the wreckage of the aircraft and its propellers on the ground serve as a reminder of the tragic event that took place there.The graves of the crew and a memorial stone bearing the names of the six men are located nearby. ​ Every year, residents and veterans come here to pay their respects.
Last update22.10.2025
For more information
The Second World War
Battle of the Bulge: War rears its ugly head one last time in Luxembourg
First World War
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/luxembourg-olympians-across-history.html
Luxembourgers who went Olympic
Since the revival of the Olympic Games by French baronPierre de Coubertinin 1896, Luxembourg has competed a total of 24 times in the Summer Games. This legacy, spanning over a century, holds the tales of many Luxembourgish Olympians striving for a medal. Here, we highlight six of these athletes who left a mark on national Olympic history.
Jean Jacoby: Unrivalled Olympic artist to date
Born in Luxembourg and raised in France,Jean Jacoby(1891-1936) lived a life marked by creativity. Early on, his teachers noticed his inherent artistic talent, leading him to study at the Beaux-arts School in Strasbourg. Although his artistic career built up gradually,Jacobygained international renown in 1923 when he won the FrenchConcours de l'Autowith his sports drawing Hurdle runner,leaving 4000 competitors in the dust. In 1924, his rise as a promising artist continued as he won a gold medal at theOlympic art competitions in Paris, beating 193 rivals. Four years later, he claimed yet another gold medal at theAmsterdam Olympics, securing his position asthe most decorated Olympic artist of all time.
Lost honours
Unfortunately, the medals from these art competitionsare not officially recognised today, tarnishingJean Jacoby's hard-earned achievements. However, it's unlikely that he will ever lose his title, as art competitions were only part of the Olympic Games from 1912 to 1948.
Jos Alzin: Luxembourg's dissatisfied first medallist
It's 1920 and the Olympic Games draw many sports enthusiasts to Antwerp, Belgium. Among its eager participants is 26-year-oldJoseph Alzin(1893-1930), better known asJos, competing in the heavyweight division of weightlifting. Prevailing over 51 competitors, he is facing his Italian rival, Filippo Bottino, in the final round. Regrettably, Bottino beatsAlzin's attempt,which the Luxembourger contests as an invalid lift, but to no avail, leaving a furiousAlzinin second place.
A medal shrouded in controversy
According to some sources,Alzinis said to have even refused his silver medal. In a later interview with a Marseilles newspaper, he revealed the poor organisation of the event, as well as the incompetence and partiality of the jury, leading him to call the tournament a place where"the splendour of sport was transformed into a disgraceful parody".
Factually speaking,Alzinwasthe first Luxembourger to officially win a medalfor the Grand-Duchy at the Olympic Games. However, the controversy surroundingMichel Théatoleaves this a contentious topic.
Josy Barthel: A national Olympic legend
Joseph Barthel(1927-1992), commonly known asJosy, is the Grand-Duchy's only Olympic athlete to bring home a gold medal. Born and raised in Luxembourg,Barthelbarely escaped military service under the German occupation at age 17. After the war, the Luxembourgish middle-distance runner began his ascent in the athletics scene, winning multiple championships up to 1951. Renowned for his exceptional sprints,Barthelutilised this talent to clinch first place in the 1500m race at the 1952 Helsinki Olympic Games.This triumph cemented his name within Luxembourg's Olympic history, and his legacy was honoured with a high school and a football stadium named after him shortly after his untimely death in 1992.
Beyond the track
While most know him for his Olympic achievement,Barthel's diligence and perseverance stretched far beyond sports. He was a qualified chemist and a Harvard graduate in environmental protection. Following his athletic career, he served as head of the Luxembourg Athletics Federation, head of the Luxembourg Olympic and Sporting Committee and later oneven as minister for Transport, Energy, the Environment and Tourism.
MichelThéato: the Frenchman who was ultimately a Luxembourger
LuxembourgerMichel Théato's (1878-1923)win in the 1900 Paris Olympics marathon is the stuff of legends. Under a scorching sun, participants got lost on the busy streets of Paris and the French winners,Michel ThéatoandÉmile Champion, were accused by US athletes of having used their knowledge of the streets of Paris to take shortcuts.Théato'svictory – confirmed by the judges – was the first Olympic victory for France in an athletics discipline.
An unclear situation
Wait, what? A French victory? Indeed,Michel Théato was living in Paris and had registered in the French team. However, as it turned out nearly 100 years later,he had never applied for French citizenship, making his victory technically a Luxembourgish victory. In 2004, Luxembourg formally tried to claim Théato's medal – to no avail. He remains registered as a French runner, althoughhis page on the IOC's websitedoes mention his Luxembourgish origins.
EdmondSchmitt: the last 1948 torchbearer
The year is 1948 and the London Games are about to begin. For the second time ever, a torch relay is to be held. Starting in Athens, the Olympic torch is to be carried across seven countries, of which Luxembourg is one.In Luxembourg, a total of 38 runners take part in the event, passing the torch between them as they cross Frisange, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg City, Ettelbruck and Wiltz over a total of 108km.
Three memorable kilometres
Among them isEdmond Schmitt (*1927), a sprinter in Luxembourg's national athletics team and today the last surviving member of the torch-bearing team, at 96 years. Together with a teammate, he receives the torch around 2.30 a.m. and carries it for 3km, in one of the most memorable moments in his life. He recalls feeling honoured on being chosen – but also that the torch started feeling quite heavy during his leg of the relay.
JoséphineJaans and the first Women Olympics
JoséphineJaans (1890-1988) was born into a world that did not look kindly on women in sports. After attending two gymnastics training camps in Switzerland, she became a teacher and started teaching PE in 1916.In the 1920s, she supported Alice Milliat and other women in their lobbying for women's participation in the 1924 Olympics– which the Olympic Committee deemed “uninteresting, inaesthetic and incorrect”.
A resolute pioneer
In response, they organised the Women's Olympiad and Women's World Games. The latter event in 1922 brought together athletes from 5 countries and over 20,000 spectators! A success which contributed to the legitimisation of women in sports. Joséphine Jaans went on to found the Luxembourg Women's Sport Federation and supported the creation of women's basketball teams. This remarkable woman, who also joined the Resistance movement in WWII, istoday considered a pioneer for women's sports in the Luxembourgish society.
Last update02.06.2025
For more information
Top 5: Luxembourgish cyclists who made the public dream
Sport infrastructure in Luxembourg
Luxembourg institute for high performance in sports
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/gelle-fra-hallmark-society-luxembourgish-history.html
Gëlle Fra - a hallmark of society and Luxembourgish history
Originally unveiled in 1923 following a citizens' initiative to pay tribute to the Luxembourg soldiers who died in the First World War, theGëlle Frahas lived an emotional life punctuated by controversy. The 100th anniversary of her creation in 2023 offers us an opportunity to look back and discover - or rediscover - our golden lady.
A monument made in Luxembourg
The Memorial consists of a21-metre obelisk on a plinth.The base featurestwo bronze sculpturesrepresenting a fallen soldier and his comrade.The gilded statue on the obelisk- called theGëlle Fra (Golden Lady)-measures 3.30 metresand symbolises an angel of peace holding a laurel wreath in her hands.
In 1920,the Luxembourg sculptor Claus Cito won the competitionto create a monument in memory of the soldiers who died during the First World War. Out of 18 submissions, he was awarded first prize by an international jury for his project"À nos braves" (To our courageous men). In his studio in Bascharage, Cito created the three sculptures for the monument, first in clay, then in plaster. The figures were then cast in bronze at the Compagnie des Bronzes foundry in Brussels. The identity of the female model who inspired the artist remains a mystery to this day.
The Gëlle Fra explained (Video/Audio)
The chequered history of theGëlle Fra
The history of the Monument of Remembrance began in December 1918, when a committee was formed with theidea of building a national monument in memory of Luxembourg soldierswho had volunteered for service with the Allied forces during the First World War. A fund-raising campaign was initiated across the country. In addition to private donations, two sets of postage stamps with a supplement were sold to finance the project. TheGëlle Frawas solemnly inaugurated in 1923 on thePlace de la Constitutionin the presence of local and foreign officials.
On 10 May 1940, at the start of the Second World War, German troops invaded Luxembourg. As part of his policy to suppress the French influence on the country,Gauleiter Gustav Simonordered theGëlle Fra to be dismantled.Destruction work began in October 1940 and after several attempts to remove theGëlle Fra, it finally fell from its plinth and broke against the obelisk.It caused serious damage to the statue's neck and feet.Thankfully, the two soldiers and the documents encased in the foundations were saved. The Jacquemart company managed to store the two soldiers in safety. A zinc box with official documents was hidden by an engineer.
Interestingly, variousLuxembourgish companies invented excuses in order to not carry out the dismantling worksdemanded by the German civil administration. In particular, they claimed that they do not have the right equipment or that the workers simply refused to perform the work. The demolition work was finally carried out by municipal workers who were threatened with dismissal if they refused.
Between 1944 and 1945, shortly after the liberation of Luxembourg by the Allies, the base of the monument was rebuilt and in 1950 the two bronze soldiers were returned to their rightful place at the foot of the statute.
In 1955, the remains of theGëlle Frawere presented during Resistance Week. Several parts subsequently disappeared andtheGëlle Frawas only found in 1981under the stands of the Josy Barthel national soccer stadium. The statute was rebuilt in December 1984 and returned to its place on the obelisk in May 1985. The reconstruction work was entrusted to Jacquemart, already involved in the construction in 1923, Massard from Kayl and Diederich-Colas.
The new version of theGëlle Franevertheless differs from Cito's original in a few details. The feet, which had been damaged in 1940, had to be rebuilt and the inclination of the head of the statute has changed. In 1923, she looked straight ahead and over the city, whereas today her head is tilted downwards, the result of her fall in 1940.
The monument initially served as a memorial to Luxembourg soldiers who fell on the battlefields during the First World War (1914-1918). Today, it also pays tribute to Luxembourg soldiers who died in the Second World War (1939-1945), to Luxembourgers who perished fighting in the Korean War (1950-1953) and to Luxembourgers who volunteered to fight in the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939).
The little story of the toe
When theGëlle Frawas demolished in 1940, a student who was watching managed to slip the original big toe into his pocket. The toe passed through several hands and is now part of the private collection of antique dealer Armand Wagner.
Controversies surrounding the sculpture
Since its inauguration, theGëlle Frahas been a source of controversy.The sheer sensuality of female sculpture was heavily criticised by the clergy. Despite her dress, in the eyes of the church she represented "pure nudity". Its location on the Place de la Constitution, in close proximity to the cathedral, was also seen as an affront by the Church.
In 2001,the work "Lady Rosa of Luxembourg", byCroatian artist Sanja Iveković, depicting a pregnant version of theGëlle Fraas part of the exhibition "Luxembourg, the Luxembourgers: consensus and restrained passions", also provoked a heated debate. For example, the Lady Rosa is judged to be a "revolting copy" of the Remembrance monument and a "disgusting parody" of a national symbol.
In 2010, theGëlle Fraadorned at the entrance to the Luxembourg pavilion at the World Expo in Shanghai. Even though the statue also benefited from a restoration,the decision to remove her from her obelisk and send her to China provoked strong reactions among the public.
Subsequently, it was exhibited for six months in Bascharage, the home town of its sculptor, where spectators could admire it at ground level before it was returned to her rightful place overlooking the city, from where visitors from across the globe come to admired her beauty!
Last update26.02.2026
For more information
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
Top 5: Historic dates in Luxembourg that you need to know
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/streets-named-after-women-ii.html
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (II)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space. This is an opportunity to look back at their past struggles and achievements, and also to inspire future generations of women, those who will have streets named after them in Luxembourg in the years to come. This article explores the lives ofMarie Heffenisch, Lily Unden, Annette Lacroix and Marie-Paule Peffer. Afirst articlein the series focuses on the achievements ofMarie-Thérèse Hartmann, Aline de Saint-Hubert, Lou Koster and Joséphine Jaans.
Marie Heffenisch (1902-1985), Medal of the Order of the Resistance
As a human rights activist, Marie Heffenisch was strongly involved inLuxembourg's resistance movements in the Second World War. After the death of her husband Sébastian Carmes in 1932, she moved to Dudelange and took over the Hengesch Hotel. In1941,the local section of theLëtzebuerger Fräiheetsbondwas foundedin the hotel, which also served as a hiding place for illegal newspapers and leaflets and sheltered seven men avoiding forced conscription to the German army. Marie was also in charge of forging papers.
The occupying forces discovered that the hotel was being used as a hiding place in1944and Marie Heffenisch was arrested and imprisoned in Luxembourg and Germany, thendeported to Ravensbrück concentration camp. According to her fellow prisoners, she was unrecognisable in Ravensbrück: she gave her food rations to young girls, arguing that she was already old and that the youngest should survive the horrors of war.
Marie Heffenisch survived the ordeal andcame back to Luxembourg in 1945when the concentration camp was liberated. She was awarded theMedal of the Order of the Resistance. There are streets named after her in Colmar-Berg and Dudelange.
Did you know?
TheLëtzebuerger Fräiheetsbond, whose local Dudelange section was founded in the hotel run by Marie Heffenisch, was one of the founder members of the National Resistance Foundation.
If you are interested in learning more about the Luxembourg Resistance and war memory projects, here are two useful links:
Lily Unden (1908-1989), a painter and resistance poet
Lily Unden's life was shaped by the two World Wars and by her vocation as an artist. She was born in Longwy, where her father worked as a metallurgical engineer, but she was repatriated with her parents to Mülhenbach when the First World War broke out. After finishing secondary school, she studiedFine Artsin Brussels, Paris, Metz and Strasbourg, then began working as a painter. She was a member of theCercle artistique luxembourgeois, where she regularly exhibited her paintings and drawings. During the Second World War, she was banned from pursuing her career because she refused to join the Nazi movement. She became a member of theResistanceand was arrested by the Gestapo in1942and interned in several prisons in Luxembourg and Germany, before finally beingdeported to Ravensbrück concentration camp.
After the liberation, she resumed her art training with courses at Columbia University School of the Arts in New York, then came back to Luxembourg to embark on a career as anart teacherat various schools.
She was a member of theAmicale des femmes concentrationnaires et prisonnières politiquesand theNational Council of the Resistanceand remained an activist for the rest of her life. There are streets bearing her name in Differdange, Sanem, Steinfort and Weiler-la-Tour. In 2015, a home for refugees in Limpertsberg was named after her.
Did you know?
Lily Unden was mainly known as a painter, but shealso wrote poetry. Her poems are dominated by her memories of the war and her painful experiences in the concentration camp. Here is an extract of her poemFraternité:
J'ai oublié ta voix ta prière ton nomMais je sais que ta vie, ta vie dont tu fis donÀ ta chère patrie et à l'humanité,N'a pas été perdue et n'est pas effacée,Qu'elle vit et revit dans la fraternité.
(I have forgotten your voice your prayer your nameBut I know that your life, your life that you gaveTo your beloved homeland and to humanity,Has not been lost and is not erased,That it lives and continues to live in fraternity.)
Les rues au féminin
In 2009, theNational Council of Women of Luxembourg(Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg-CNFL) launched the projectLes rues au féminin(streets named after women) to raise awareness among political leaders of the need to increase the visibility of deserving, active women in public spaces in Luxembourg.
The CNFL has also launched several initiatives in collaboration with local authorities and municipal gender equality bodies in Luxembourg. The aim of the "Affichons l'égalité"(diplaying equality) initiative, organised in connection with International Women's Day, was totemporarily and symbolically rename streetswith the names of women who left their mark on history. The "Who is she?"initiative focused instead on streets already named after women, providing an image and aQR code to give people the opportunity to find out more about womencelebrated in the public arena.
Annette Lacroix (1927-2013), the first woman in the Council of State
The life of Annette Lacroix (married name Schwall) was closely linked to thedefence of women's rights. Although she came from a well-known and wealthy family, she chose to stand up forsocial justicefrom a young age. During the Nazi occupation, sherefused to join the Hitler Youthand was expelled from secondary school. It was only after the war that she was able to resume herstudies in Luxembourg and Paris and become a lawyer.
She was an advocate for the Luxembourg women's rights movement, and together with other female lawyers she draftedlegislative proposals for women's emancipation. These texts on how marriage affected the respective rights and duties of spouses were submitted to the Chamber of Deputies by the only female member of parliament at the time, Astrid Lulling. The explanatory statement for one of these proposals reads: 'The aim of thislegislative proposalis to speed up a reform that will give married Luxembourgish women equality before the law, as decreed by our Constitution but made impossible by the provisions of our Civil Code, which reduces married women to the status of children and weak-minded individuals.'
In1975, she became thefirst womanto be appointed as amember of the Council of State. The Council of State was established in 1856 but it would takemore than a hundred years for a woman to be given a seat in the institution: Annette Lacroix was member number 134. She remained a member for 24 years.
She never stopped fighting for gender equality, especially the question of equal pay, and she was involved in theLuxembourg Federation of University Women(Fédération luxembourgeoise des femmes universitaires) and theNational Council of Women of Luxembourg(Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg-CNFL). She was also determined to help people in need, and in 1988 she became a member of the Board of Directors of theLuxembourg Red Cross. Streets in Luxembourg City and Steinfort are named after her.
Did you know?
Annette Lacroix received the Anne Beffort Prize from the Luxembourg City Council in 2008.
Since 2003, this prize has been awarded to an individual, a non-profit association, a group or an institution working to promote equal opportunities between men and women.
The prize is named after the co-founder of theLycée de Jeunes Fillesin Luxembourg City and the first woman teacher in the country.Find out more about her in our article on pioneering women from Luxembourg.
Marie-Paule Peffer (1929-1999), breaking taboos around family planning
Marie-Paule Peffer (married name Molitor) is often described as atrailblazer. Her decision to study medicine was highly unusual for a woman at that time, but she was supported by her family. After completing her school certificate in Lausanne, shepursued studies in medicinein Switzerland,specialising in gynaecology.
From the beginning of her professional career, she was committed to modern sex education: shewas a campaigner for access to contraception and for decriminalising abortion, issues that were taboo in Luxembourg society in the 1960s and 1970s. She was an excellent writer and put her talent to good use by writing statements and letters to the editors of newspapers, and alsopublishing articlesin scientific journals. Her activism provoked strong reactions from conservative forces and also from the Medical Board, which campaigned against her plan to establish aLuxembourg Movement for Family Planning and Sex Education(Mouvement luxembourgeois pour le planning familial et l'éducation sexuelle) and initiated disciplinary proceedings against her. The movement was finally set up in1965and is subsidised by the government from 1972. Marie-Paule Peffer served aspresident of the movement from 1981 to 1992. When the abortion law was reformed in 1978, family planning centres were given a legal basis.
She was awarded several prizes throughout her career, including theOrder of Merit of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in 1997. The towns of Bertrange, Differdange, Mamer, Sanem and Strassen have named streets after her.
Did you know?
Abortion:in Luxembourg, any pregnant woman can request a termination before the end of the 12th week of pregnancy or before the 14th week of amenorrhoea.
The new Abortion Act came into force in December 2014. It introduced major changes: abortion is no longer part of the Criminal Code; the notion of 'situation of distress' no longer figures in the law; and a second psychosocial consultation is no longer compulsory for women over the age of majority.
Further information can be found on theMinistry of Healthwebsite.
Several sources were used to write the biographies of the women presented in this article, especially theLes rues au fémininproject (National Council of Women of Luxembourg /Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg), the Fraendag.lu project (CIDFraen an Gender) and theDictionnaire des auteurs luxembourgeois(National Literature Centre /Centre national de la littérature).
Last update23.02.2026
For more information
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/streets-named-after-women-i.html
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space. This is an opportunity to look back at their past struggles and achievements, and also to inspire future generations of women, those who will have streets named after them in Luxembourg in the years to come. This first article explores the lives ofMarie-Thérèse Hartmann, Aline de Saint-Hubert, Lou Koster and Joséphine Jaans. Asecond articlewill focus on the achievements ofMarie Heffenisch, Lily Unden, Annette Lacroix and Marie-Paule Peffer.
Marie-Thérèse Hartmann (1858-1923), a pioneering painter
Marie-Thérèse Hartmann wasone of the first Luxembourgish women to study abroad. Her father, the architect Antoine Hartmann, supported his daughter in herartistic education. At the tender age of 19 she went toDüsseldorfto study with the artist Gustav Süs, then spent two years inMunichas a student of Sandor Liezen-Mayer. It was inParis, at the school run by Émile Carolus-Duran and Jean-Jacques Henner, recently opened to female artists, that she found her vocation as a portrait painter. When she came back to Luxembourg, she married the lawyer Mathias Glaesener and pursued her artistic career.
Thepioneering painterwas characterised by her audacity and independence, at a time when very few women were able to attend public schools; those who did receive an education generally went to religious schools. Luxembourg City and Sanem have streets named after her.
Did you know?
You can see two portraits of former Luxembourg Prime Minister Paul Eyschen by Marie-Thérèse Hartmann in theNationalmusée um Fëschmaart.
Aline de Saint-Hubert (1874-1947), a feminist philanthropist
Aline de Saint-Hubert can be considered as thefounder of the bourgeois women's movementin Luxembourg. She married Émile Mayrisch in 1894 andin 1906 she set up the Organisation for Women's Interests, the first women's organisation in Luxembourg. The association was active in various fields, including providing legal protection for women and improving living conditions for worker families.
But the main aim was toestablish a secondary school for girls: a non-denominational school offering a school certificate that would give girls access to university studies and liberal professions.
Aline de Saint-Hubert also pioneered various social movements and was thefounder and chair of the Luxembourg section of the Red Cross. In 1932, Grand Duchess Charlotte awarded her theCross of Honour for Ladies of the Order of Civil and Military Merit of Adolph of Nassau.
In her will, shebequeathed theChâteau de Colpachto the Red Cross in. The building is now a rehabilitation facility that houses the National Post-Oncological Rehabilitation Service and the National Physical Rehabilitation Service. The towns of Bertrange, Dudelange, Esch-sur-Alzette, Walferdange and Steinfort have named roads and public spaces after her. Her married name was also used for theLycée Aline Mayrisch.
Did you know?
Aline de Saint-Hubert was also interested in art and literature, and she sought tomediate between French and German cultures. She was an admirer and friend of many intellectuals and writers, including André Gide, and she turned herChâteau de Colpach– where she settled with her husband in 1920 – into aliterary salonand a meeting place for artists.
She also wroteliterary articles and reviews, as well as an autobiographicaltravel memoir:"Paysages de la trentième année". She often wrote under pseudonyms, the most well known being Alain Desportes.
A book containing her correspondence with André Gide is available at theNational Library of Luxembourg.
Les rues au féminin
In 2009, theNational Council of Women of Luxembourg(Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg-CNFL) launched the projectLes rues au féminin(Streets  named after women) to raise awareness among political leaders of the need to increase the visibility of deserving, active women in public spaces in Luxembourg.
As part of the project, a list of streets compiled in 2021 showed howwomen are under-represented in public streets, squares and buildingscompared with men. In Luxembourg City, for example, just 5.7% of streets and squares were named after women, compared with 49% named after men. In that year,of the 102 municipalities in Luxembourg, 59 had no public spaces named after women. It is not just about the figures, but rather what they represent: 'We need to remember that the names of streets, squares or buildings arevectors of memoryand that this gives them a political aspect. As this official memory is selective, it isimportant not to forget deserving and committed womenand to make them visible in public places,' explains the CNFL.
Lou Koster (1889-1973), a pioneering composer
Lou Koster was one ofvery few girls in Luxembourg who had access to musical education in childhood. In the absence of formal education, her grandfather, Franz Ferdinand Bernhard Hoebich,Kapellmeisterat the Grand Ducal Court, gave hermusical theory, violin and pianolessons. Her formal education at a musical institution only began when the Conservatoire de Luxembourg was founded in Luxembourg City in 1906 and she was able to perfect her violin, piano, music theory and harmony skills. Shetaught at the Conservatoire herself between 1908 and 1954. When it came tocomposition and orchestration, she wasself-taught.
As a composer – her real passion – she was particularly interested in Luxembourgish poetry. Her adaptation of Batty Weber's libretto"An der Schwemm"("In the swimming pool") as an operetta marked the beginning of her career as a composer in 1922. It was in 1972, at the age of 83, that she experienced her greatest success, when her oratorio"Der Geiger von Echternach"("The violinist of Echternach"), based on a text by Nik Welter, was played by the RTL Orchestra and the Uelzecht Choir in the Basilica of Echternach.
Her musical career never distracted her from herinvolvement in social issues and efforts to improve the rights of oppressed people and minorities, especially feminist movements. Streets in Luxembourg City, Mersch and Strassen are named after her.
A little anecdote
In Lou Koster's family, musical education was not just a hobby. Lou and her sisters, Lina and Laure, learned from a young age how to make a living through music: they accompanied silent films and performed in café-concerts, for weddings and parties... and also in swimming pools. Lou Koster was an enthusiastic swimmer, and during the breaks in her swimming classes at the LuxembourgSwimming Club, she provided a piano accompaniment for the musical interludes played by an orchestra positioned above the shower cubicles.
Joséphine Jaans (1890-1988), a pioneer in women's sport
Joséphine Jaans (married name Jacquemart) can be considered as apioneer in women's sport in Luxembourg. She was proactive and committed to sport, dedicating herself to what would become her profession. After attending two gymnastics training camps in Switzerland, she became a teacher and startedteaching at theLycée de Jeunes Filles d'Esch-sur-Alzettein 1916, where she sought to introducenew approaches to physical education.
In1925, together with Andrée Mayrisch and Paula Weber, shefounded the Luxembourg Women's Sport Federation, the first official women's sports body. The founders chose basketball as the flagship discipline of the new federation – a successful strategy, as by 1926 Luxembourg had 14 women's clubs! But the enterprise was doomed to failure: a lack of financial resources and especially thequestion of appropriate clothingproved to be too great an obstacle in a traditionalist context which rejected a woman considered too modern for her time. Joséphine Jaans refused to let that stop her, however, and in1937she organised the thirdFederal Women's Gymnastics Festival, where she led the parade.
Her efforts were not limited to women's sport. During theSecond World War, she joined theLëtzebuerger Patriote Liga, a resistance movementthat fought against the German occupation. In 1941, she was arrested with two other resistance fighters and spent two years in prison. After the war, she worked to help people in need. Luxembourg City and Bertrange have named streets after her.
Did you know?
Joséphine Jaans firmly believed that women should be allowed to compete at the Olympic Games. Given the stiff opposition within the leadership of the International Olympic Committee, a number of women, including Alice Milliat from France but also Joséphine Jaans, had the idea of organising Olympic Games for women. The firstWomen's World Gameswere held in Paris on 20 August1922.
Several sources were used to write the biographies of the women presented in this article, especially theLes rues au fémininproject (National Council of Women of Luxembourg /Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg), the Fraendag.lu project (CIDFraen an Gender) and theDictionnaire des auteurs luxembourgeois(National Literature Centre /Centre national de la littérature).
Last update23.02.2026
For more information
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (II)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/top-5-agreements-luxembourg-history.html
Top 5: agreements that have shaped Luxembourg's history
This time, our Top 5 series shines a light on the international treaties signed by Luxembourg. Unfortunately, we have to leave out some of the more important treaties, but this selection will allow us to look back at key moments in Luxembourg's history. We will cast a light on five agreements that have marked our past, define our present and point to our future.
The Treaties of London – 1839 and 1867
We refer to theTreatiesof London because there were two and both played a key role in shaping Luxembourg of today.
The first Treaty of London was signed on19th April 1839and marked a major turning point for our country. This date symbolisesthe birth of the Grand Duchy in its present form by establishing the borders that have not changed since.The history of this treaty is intimately linked to the independence of Belgium in 1830. The major powers were eager to extinguish the revolutionary flames that were spreading across Europe. As such, they decided to separate the Belgians and the Dutch by creating the Kingdom of Belgium, while dividing the territories of the Grand Duchy between the two antagonists. The Belgian parliament accepted the terms of the treaty but William I refused to acknowledge the treaty for eight years. It was not until 1839 that the Dutch king finally agreed and concluded the treaty with France, Austria, Great Britain, Prussia and Russia. Henceforth, there were two Luxembourgs: Belgian Luxembourg (currently a province of Belgium) and the Grand Duchy, which remained under the sovereignty of the Orange-Nassau family, but acquired its present geographical form of 2,586km2.
Although enjoying territorial independence, the Grand Duchy remained attached to the Netherlands through the dynastic link and to Germany through its membership of the Germanic Confederation. In 1866, the Austro-Prussian War led to the dissolution of the Confederation. Faced with Prussia's expansion, France sought territorial compensation by trying to buy Luxembourg. William III accepted the deal, but Prussia continued to occupy the City of Luxembourg and opposed the plan. The major powers tried to resolve this new crisis by calling a congress in London. A compromise was reached via the secondTreaty of London on 11th May 1867: Prussia withdrew its garrison, the fortress was dismantled and theGrand Duchy was declared permanently neutral.In return, France renounced its territorial claims.
A little anecdote
The Treaties of London not only brought independence and neutrality to Luxembourg but alsoa whole new economy based on roses. The former military wastelands of the Glacis and Limpertsberg, on which any construction was previously forbidden for strategic reasons, was subsequently made available and gardeners specialising in the cultivation of roses - they began to nurture these lands. This endeavour proved so successful that Luxembourg was known as theRose Countryduring the Belle Epoque!
The treaty of the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union - 1921
Before the First World War, Luxembourg was economically linked to Germany through the Zollverein customs union. This union proved highly beneficial for Luxembourg and led to the development of its steel industry. However, the day after the First World War, Luxembourg denounced the union and concluded the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) with Belgium. Originally signed for a fifty-year period and renewed regularly thereafter, it forgedlasting ties between the two countries. The Belgian franc became the common currency, but Luxembourg nonetheless retained its right to issue its own money.
At present, cooperation extends far beyondeconomic and monetary matters. The renewed agreements have offered a framework forenhanced political and administrative cooperationin various fields such as customs and excise, justice, public safety and health.
100 ans UEBL (Video/Audio YouTube)
Would you like to know what the BLEU means today for the citizens of Luxembourg and Belgium? Don't miss the series of videos to mark the centenary celebrations.
A little anecdote
The Belgian-Luxembourg love affair was not a case of love at first sight! In the double referendum conducted in 1919, 80% of Luxembourgers voted to maintain the dynasty and 73% voted for an economic union with France. However, they declined Luxembourg's territorial flirtations! In 1920, Luxembourg entered into negotiations with Belgium, which led to the signing of the treaty establishing the BLEU. The two nations have just celebrated their centennial anniversary.
United Nations Charter – 1945
The Second World War led to a change of direction for Luxembourg’s foreign policy. On 10th May 1940, Luxembourg was occupied by German forces and Grand Duchess Charlotte and the government went into exile and settled in London and Ottawa, joining the Allies.Luxembourgabandoned its status of neutrality andsecured a place in the international community that was formed after 1945. As such, the Grand Duchy became a founding member of all post-war institutions which promoted multilateral cooperation, including theUnited Nations.
The UN Charter was drafted between 1941 and 1945, while the fight against the Axis powers was still ongoing. The starting point was the London Declaration, signed in 1941, in which the signatories undertook to 'work together, and with other free peoples, in war and peace'. This lead to a series of agreements and conferences, culminating in the foundation of the organisation and drafting of the charter. Representatives of fifty countries gathered for the San Francisco Conference, where theUnited Nations Charter was unanimously adopted on 25th June 1945. Luxembourg is one of the founding countries of the United Nations and also helped to draft the charter.
Since October 2021,Luxembourg has held a seat on theHuman Rights Council, an intergovernmental body of the United Nations system. It is composed of 47 countries that are elected by the General Assembly and are responsible for fostering and protecting human rights worldwide. This is Luxembourg's first term on the Council since its creation in 2006 and covers the period2022-2024.
Story of a sculpture
Non-violenceis a sculpture created by the Swedish artist Carl Fredrik Reuterswärd following the murder of musician and singer John Lennon in 1980. The work of art depicts a knotted gun and is intended to be a symbol of non-violence. There are three original copies of the sculpture, with two of them linked to the Grand Duchy. In 1988 the government of Luxembourg donated one of the originals to the United Nations. It is now situated in the organisation's piazza in New York. Another copy is located at the European Commission's headquarters in the Kirchberg district of Luxembourg.
Benelux treaties – 1948, 1958 and 2008
Post-war liberation is also reflected in regional cooperation. In1943, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg signed amonetary agreementfixing the exchange rate between the Belgian-Luxembourg franc and the Dutch guilder. This event was followed by the creation of a customs union: theBenelux Customs Unioncame into force in1948. The links between these three countries continued to develop: the treaty of 3rd February1958created theBenelux Economic Union, for an initial period of fifty years. The 1958 treaty aimed to broaden and deepen cooperation between the three countries, in particular by enabling them to adopt a common financial and social policy.
Benelux played apioneering role by strengthening post-war European cooperation. Some of the initiatives launched by the treaty establishing the Benelux Economic Union have been highly successful. Moreover, their application has been extended to the European sphere, such as the free movement of persons, the internal market and police cooperation.
In view of the expiry of the 1958 treaty after fifty years and to give a renewed sense of impetus to Benelux cooperation, anew treaty was signed in 2008under a new name: theBeneluxUnion. The union currently focuses on three main themes: the internal market and economic union, sustainable development and justice, and domestic affairs.
Luxembourg presidency of the Benelux Union 2022
In 2022, Luxembourg holds the Presidency of the Committee of Ministers of the Benelux Union. The main areas of work are based on three priorities: emerge stronger from the pandemic, promote synergies with neighbouring regions and strive to create a green, safe and competitive Benelux.
Treaty of Rome - 1957 and Schengen Agreements - 1985 and 1990
Luxembourg regained its foothold on the regional and international stage after the Second World War. However, thedecisive opening up of the country took place within the framework of European unification. It was possibly no coincidence that the historic initiative of uniting Europeans came fromRobert Schuman, a French minister for Foreign Affairs born in Luxembourg of a French father and a Luxembourgish mother. When Schuman launched his plan outlining the creation of a European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1950, Luxembourg was directly involved.
The ECSC was the first step towards the creation of the European Union, which was consolidated a few years later. In1957, alongside France, Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands, Luxembourg was a signatory of theTreaties of Rome, which founded theEuropean Economic Community(EEC) andregulated the use of nuclear energy(Euratom). In the negotiations, the government managed to have the principle of legal equality accepted for all States, even the smallest, and to obtain direct representation in the European Institutions.
With new Member States joining and the signing of new treaties, the organisation was transformed, over the following decades, from the EEC into the European Union we know today. Among the many agreements that have shaped this change, theSchengen agreementsare closely associated with Luxembourg. 'The Schengen Agreements are emblematic for our country', the head of theEuropean Museum Schengenexplains. 'As a result of these agreements, Luxembourg became known as the country where the principles of the European Union were experienced in full'. The first agreement was signed on14th June 1985on the ship MS Princess Marie-Astrid. On19th June 1990, a second agreement was signed at the same location, in order to set applicable legal procedures. Today, they are considered the cornerstones offree movement between the Member Statesand the symbol of an open-mindedness that is enjoyed in Luxembourg on a daily basis.
MS Princesse Marie-Astrid, a historic ship
In 2021, Luxembourg acquired the ship MS Princesse Marie-Astrid, on which the Schengen Agreement was signed in 1985. The former ship had been sailing for some years under the name MS Regensburg, taking tourists on journeys down the Danube. The Grand Duchy aims to convert the ship into an exhibition and performance space and to build a new quay in Schengen. The ship will be kept seaworthy and be docked in Schengen near the European Schengen Museum. The ship will travel throughout Europe for special events.
Last update11.06.2025
For more information
Top 5: Historic dates in Luxembourg that you need to know
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Top 5: Bridges that must be crossed
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/top-5-historic-dates-luxembourg.html
Top 5: Historic dates in Luxembourg that you need to know
Present day Luxembourg is the result of over 1,000 years of eventful history that shaped its society into something unique. The following five dates take you on a journey back to discover key moments that are crucial for understanding Luxembourg’s identity and political evolution and its commitment to the European cause.
963
Every schoolchild in Luxembourg learns about thefoundation of Luxembourg City in 963. That year is noted on acharter that nobleman Siegfried signed with the Saint Maximin Abbey in Trier to acquire a promontory overlooking a river. ‘His intention was less to found a settlement, which developed naturally around the first small castle, but rather to strengthen Emperor Otto’s ambition to integrate Lotharingia into the Holy Roman Empire,’ Gilles Genot from theLuxembourg City Museumstates. Indeed, the promontory was located in anexcellent strategic location: it was defendable, close to water which could turn mills, and on a major trade routeconnecting Trier and Reims. All of which made Luxembourg a popular location to settle. The charter itself received much attention during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and the year came to be regarded as the official foundation year of Luxembourg City. ‘This year is a very important part of Luxembourg’s collective memory,’ Gilles Genot adds. And the surroundingmyth of the mermaid Melusinaand the curse hanging over the city certainly did its part to popularise the date.
1839: Independence to end turmoil
'The most defining element about Luxembourg’s independence in 1839 is its borders'says Simone Feis, curator at theMusée national d'archéologie, d'histoire et d'art(MNAHA). Indeed, even though the countrylost nearly half of its territory to newly constituted Belgium(today the BelgianProvince du Luxembourg),the 1839 Treaty of London defined its borders to the shape we know today, marked by a series of boundary markers (see picture). The treaty put anend to a decade of turmoil, in which the population had been torn between its allegiance to the Dutch king who formally ruled the Grand Duchy, the Prussian occupation of Luxembourg City and the strong sympathies of large parts of the country’s population for the democratic principles that the Belgians had been fighting for. Even though Luxembourg continued to be ruled by the Dutch king and was far from being completely independent, 1839 marks a turning point in our history.The treaty and constitutional charter of 1841 conferred to the country a political stability that allowed us to continue building a state and a nation that set us apart from our neighbours.
1867: 'Perpetual' neutrality and European engagement
In 1867, Prussia and Napoleon III’s France were ready to go to war over Luxembourg, or rather its mighty fortifications. A last-minute conference in London prevented what could well have become a large-scale continental conflict.The1867 Luxembourg Crisisand subsequent Treaty of London brought down Luxembourg City’s famed fortifications – and conferred the status of neutrality upon the county. 'Luxembourg City was finally able to grow andreinvent itself as a European capital', thus Ralph Lange, scientific assistant at the MNAHA. The country retained its strategic position in the middle of Western Europe, although not based on military might:economy and peaceful engagement with the neighbours was now on the agenda, and the following decades saw the evolution of a powerful industrial complex, some of which rings through to today. 'The ripples of that crisis are perhaps more felt today than they were in 1867', Ralph Lange says. Indeed, theymay well mark the beginnings of Luxembourg’s engagement for a peaceful coexistence in Europe.
10 May 1940: The start of 4 years of hardship
The beginning of theSecond World War in Western Europe on 10 May 1940is an important date in many countries in Europe. For Luxembourg, it has a special meaning however, and one that left its mark on how Luxembourgers perceived themselves. Indeed,Luxembourg was a neutral country in 1940, with but a small force to call army, in any case not enough to resist a German onslaught. Nonetheless, the countryadopted defensive measures on the eve of war; measures that would leave no doubtthatLuxembourgers would not stand aside and that affirmed to the world our will to remain an independant country– thusBenoîtNiederkorn, curator ofLuxembourg’s National Museum of Military History. The blocks you can see on these pictures were part of the so-called "SchusterLine", roadblocks that were built on all of Luxembourg’s borders, but which, on the eve of invasion, were only closed on the German border.
14 June 1985: Opening Europe's borders in Schengen
‘Open borders beget open minds’, thusMartina Kneip’s definition of theSpirit of Schengen, which is omnipresent in this small Luxembourgish village on the Moselle. The German and French borders are so close, and yet barely noticeable, an abstract concept in a region wherepeople live open borders on a daily basis. And whenMartina Kneiptalks about the region, it is without a doubt that she defines it independently of national borders.‘The Schengen Agreements are emblematic for our country’, thehead of the European Museumexplains. ‘Through them,Luxembourg did get known as the country where the principles of the EU are lived like they should.’The Agreements, which were signed on 14 June 1985by Luxembourg, Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands on the passenger ship MSPrincesse Marie-Astrid, are today’s cornerstone of the free movement between member states, and stand for an openness of mind which is lived in Luxembourg every day.
Delve some more into Luxembourg's history
Luxembourg's history is full of important events that shaped the country and its population - here are some key events that did not quite make the final cut but that you should know about.
1919
1919 is no doubt one of the most turbulent years for Luxembourg.Political and social conflicts that had been simmering for a few years boiled over after the end of the German occupation in 1918. While the clash between the Crown and the Government could potentially have threatened Luxembourg’s independence, the 1919 Referendum and changes to the electoral system, especiallyuniversal suffrage, steadied not only the monarchy but also Luxembourg’s institutions. Indeed, Régis Moes, one of the MNAHA’s curators, points out thatall contemporary institutions, including political parties and unions, were founded during those years.
1921
The ‘Luxembourg model’ of social concertation continues to be a major factor in the political and social stability of the country. The premise of this model is thatemployers, unions and the government seek agreements and compromise in negotiations, rather than relying on industrial action. The origin of this model is rooted in theviolent miners’ strikes in the south of the country in 1921,which the government was only able to put down with the help of the French army.
Last update23.05.2025
For more information
History
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/pioneering-women-luxembourg.html
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
International Women's Day is celebrated on 8th March in many countries around the world. It gives us a chance to revisit their past struggles and achievements and to inspire future generations of women. It is also an opportunity to get to know or rediscover eight female pioneers from Luxembourg who have made significant breakthroughs in a wide range of fields, from entrepreneurship and education to politics, gastronomy and the arts.
Barbe Peckels (1836-1906), the first step for female entrepreneurship
Barbe Peckels was one of thefirst female business owners and managersin Luxembourg. In1852, with her husband, she purchased a house under construction in an area called "La Gaichel". Together they ran the farmhouse inn. At the time, hikers used to visit the inn to savour traditional regional cuisine and the specialties of Barbe Peckels, who was a gifted cook. She remained in charge of the family business until her death in 1906; her culinary spirit lives on to this day. As a matter of fact, this inn has been transformed over the years and at present, theDomaine de La Gaichelhas two hotels and three restaurants.
A little anecdote
Since its creation, theDomaine de La Gaichelhas always been passed down from mother to daughter. The management of this family business is currently in its sixth female generation!
Anne Beffort (1880-1966), pioneer in education for girls
Anne Beffort's life revolved around education. Eager to continue her studies beyond upper primary school, she chose the only possible path at a time when there was no secondary school for girls; she attended a training school to become a teacher. But her thirst for knowledge was not quenched: after graduating with four teaching diplomas, she studied literature at the Münster and Paris universities. In1909, she became thefirst Luxembourgish woman to gain a doctorate. Anne Beffort was alsothe first female French teacher of Luxembourg originand the pioneer of theLycée des Jeunes Filles de Luxembourg, which was inaugurated in the same year that she defended her thesis.
A little anecdote
Anne Beffort was an admirer of Victor Hugo and devoted numerous scientific studies to his work. On the 50th anniversary of the poet's death in 1935, she also actively encouraged the Luxembourg State to purchase the house in which Hugo had lived during his exile in Vianden, in order to create a literary museum. Her plea work even earned her the Legion of Honour, which was awarded by Robert Schuman in 1948.Victor Hugo's Househas been completely renovated.
Marguerite Thomas-Clément (1886-1979), the first female parliamentarian
The active and passive right to vote for women in Luxembourg was adopted in 1919. This turning point in the history of the democracy led to the arrival of thefirst female parliamentarian in Luxembourg: Marguerite Thomas-Clement, theonly female member of parliament between 1919 and 1931.
As soon as she was elected on the social-democratic ticket of the Centre constituency, she introduced a draft bill in favour of civil and economic equality of both sexes; the bill did not pass. Nevertheless, she continued to raise various issues in parliament with the aim of improving women's working conditions and pay, as well as denouncing the shocking hygiene in the capital's maternity ward. Moreover, she did not shy away from defending prostitutes imprisoned in the women's prison for spreading contagious diseases. After becoming estranged from the Socialist Party, she was not re-elected in 1931.
The women's vote in Luxembourg
At the beginning of the 20th century, Luxembourg's political system was based on universal census suffrage. Hence, only men who paid a certain tax could vote or be elected to parliament. At this time, women were denied the right to vote. Although a petition for women's suffrage had been put forward by the Social Democrats in 1906, it was not until after the First World War that progress was finally made.
In Luxembourg, some activists distinguished themselves owing to their resolve and commitment, and paved the way for the recognition of women's rights.Marguerite Mongenast-Servais, Marguerite Hey-Fink and Jeanne Meyer-Heuckéwere the three pioneers who succeeded in collecting signatures to present thepetition for active and passive voting rights for womento parliament; it was finallyadopted on 8th May 1919.
Katrin C. Martin (1901-1983), pioneer in the field of journalism
Katrin C. Martin was one of thefirst Luxembourgish women to work as a journalist. After completing her studies as a schoolteacher (1920-1922), she went to Paris where she became a social columnist and interviewed famous writers, such as the Noble Prize winner Anatole France. She obtained Italian nationality through marriage in 1927, and took extensive and exotic journeys across the globe. She spoke six languages and even worked as a journalist in Buenos Aires.
Toward the end of the 1930s, she returned to Luxembourg and became a writer for theLuxemburger Zeitungand subsequently theEscher Tageblatt. After penning an article denouncing National Socialism, the Nazi occupiers threatened her with expulsion to Italy. It is claimed that she wrote a book on the Occupation in Luxembourg, which has since disappeared. After 1945, she worked as a freelance journalist and writer. She published her works in theCahiers Luxembourgeoisand other publications. In 1948, she became the first female editor of theRevue, which she helped transform into a popular magazine. In 1951, she became director of the regional edition of the Belgian daily newspaperLa Meuse.
A little anecdote
In Luxembourg, women's journalism was born in the 1920s and was initially nurtured by women who had often trained as teachers. This was due to the fact that until 1909, when the Lycée des Jeunes Filles de Luxembourg opened its doors, these higher education institutions were the only ones open to women.
Trailer of the documentary "Inspiring Women of Luxembourg". © Femmes pionnières/CNA 2022 (Video/Audio)
"Inspiring Women of Luxembourg. Past, Present and Future" is a documentary film directed by Anne Schroeder, in collaboration with the asbl Femmes pionnières du Luxembourg and the Centre national de l'audiovisuel. This documentary presents 12 women, with exceptional careers, who have marked or are marking the history of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Luxembourg director Anne Schroeder has already traced the emergence and evolution of women's emancipation in her film "Histoire(s) de Femme(s)" (Samsa Film, 2018).
Madeleine Frieden-Kinnen (1915-1999), women in government
Despite the first woman entering the Luxembourg parliament in 1919, it took almost 50 years before awoman became a government memberin the Grand Duchy. In1967, Madeleine Frieden-Kinnen became Secretary of State in charge of the portfolios of Family, Youth and National Education. Following a government crisis that led to early elections, she became Minister for Family, Youth and Social Solidarity, as well as Minister for Religion and Culture in1969. She was thefirst woman to have a ministerial brief.
A little anecdote
After a press campaign in the socialist newspaperTageblattwhich accused her of 'behaviour contrary to moral standards', she resigned her mandate in 1972. The affair has long haunted political life in Luxembourg and has been the subject of numerous investigations, including "Un monde misogyne et cruel"(A misogynistic and cruel world), by the journalist Yolande Kieffer.
Elsy Jacobs (1933-1998), braking barriers in women's cycling
1958is a key year in the annals of women's cycling in Luxembourg. The cyclist, Elsy Jacobs won thefirst organised Women's Road World Championshipin Reims in August. A few months later, she set a new women's hour world record on the track at the Vigorelli velodrome in Milan, covering 41.348km; a record that remained unbeaten for 14 years. Elsy Jacobs thrived in a competitive environment and, from 1958, she travelled all over Europe in search of victories. During the course of her career, she competed in about 1,200 races and had more than 300 victories to her name.
Since 2008, theElsy Jacobs Grand Prixhas taken place in Garnich, her village of birth. The 2021 Elsy Jacobs Race, which will take place on 1 May, includes up to four different circuits between 60km and 100km.
Elsy Jacobs - Grouss-Herzogin vum Velosport (Video/Audio YouTube)
The Grand Duchess of cycling
The documentary "Elsy Jacobs – Grouss-Herzogin vum Velosport", by Michel Tereba, revisits the achievements of the lady nicknamed the Grand Duchess of cycling by her friends and competitors.
Léa Linster (1955-), an extraordinaryBocuse d'Or
Léa Linster is the culinary master of the Grand Duchy's haute cuisine. And for good reason!She is the only woman and the only Luxembourgish chef to have won theBocuse d'Or(the international gastronomic competition), created by the French chef Paul Bocuse in 1987. This was a momentous year for Léa Linster: she obtained her master's degree in cuisine (once again, the first Luxembourgish woman to obtain such an accolade) and won her first Michelin star for herrestaurant in Frisange. She won theBocuse d'Orin1989, thus confirming her status as a culinary great.
Recognised across the world, Léa Linster has written several books and even presented cooking shows on television. It's next to impossible to list all the awards she has received during her career! Although she has since passed the culinary baton to her son Louis Linster, her spirit is ever-present in the gourmet restaurant that showcases her name.
A little anecdote
Nowadays, the restaurant includes a main room, a winter garden and a bar; the surrounding park was completely replanted in a naturalistic style in 2010. However, back in the 1950s, the site housed a petrol station which was used as a bar, bowling alley and tobacconist's shop.
Su-Mei Tse (1973-), Golden Lion of the Venice Biennale
Unsurprisingly, Luxembourg contemporary art and Su-Mei Tse go hand-in-hand. Her creations combine music, photography, sculpture, video and other art forms and, as such, it is impossible to compartmentalize her work as she regularly combines several artistic disciplines. Having trained as a classical cellist, she also studied textile and printing. She graduated from the Beaux-Arts in Paris in 2000. Her participation at theVenice Biennale in 2003proved to be a turning point for her career and Luxembourg in the world of art, as she was awarded theGolden Lionfor her exhibit "Air conditioned", atruly unique exploit. Since then, she has gained international recognition: her work, which raises questions about time, memory, musicality and language, is exhibited across the globe.
Atelier Luxembourg: Su-Mei Tse (Video/Audio YouTube)
A little anecdote
At the entrance of the Luxembourg pavilion at the 2003 Biennale, Su-Mei Tse installed an acoustic anechoic chamber, also called a 'echo-free chamber' as it does not reflect sounds. Some visitors cherished the peace and quiet and spent many hours in the chamber, even taking time to flick through the exhibition brochures. Others felt imprisoned by the silence. It was a truly intense experience!
Last update20.02.2026
For more information
Equal opportunities
History
Genaveh: Luxembourgish chocolate jewellery boxes
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/personnages-celebres-luxembourg.html
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Today, we will cast an eye on five famous people who have sojourned in Luxembourg. Let us begin with the person who redesigned the fortress of the capital. In this day and age, many old and new buildings bear the name ofVauban- the famous marshal and architect. However, the Grand Duchy has also inspired several great writers, such asJohann Wolfgang von Goethe,Victor HugoandErnest Hemingway. We will also delve intoWilhelm Voigt's stroke of genius.
Sébastien le Prestre de Vauban(1633-1707)
Thearchitectural charmof the city of Luxembourg owes a great deal to the countless foreign rulers - the Burgundians, Prussians, French, Austrian and Spanish Habsburgs - who governed the country and left their respective stamp on the urban landscape of the capital. And yet, to a great extent, it was due to the compulsion of the French military engineerSébastien le Prestre de Vaubanthat the face of the city and, in particular, the fortress witnessed a radical transformation.
MarshallVauban, who also acted as an advisor toLouisXIV, carried out major expansion and refurbishment works on thefortifications of the city: in the lower town, notably inPfaffenthal, he built defensive bastions into the defensive ring around the city in the outlying areas, these included theBourbon FortandNiedergrünewaldFort; he also constructed the barracks on theRhamandSaint Espritplateaus.
Nowadays, the name of the French architect is synonymous with the image of the fortress of Luxembourg. In short,Vaubanthe engineer transformed the Grand Duchy into the most important fortification in Europe. Several old buildings such as theVaubanTowersand theVauban Villa, as well as more contemporary buildings such as theLycée Vaubanbear his name.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe(1749-1832)
Following a short stay in Luxembourg on 26 August 1792, during a military campaign which led him to France, the German poet and writerJohann Wolfgang von Goetheembarked on asecond journeyto the Grand Duchyon 14 October of the same year.
Haunted by the horrors of war, looting and desolation, the famous German visitor left France, during the retreat of his troops after theBattle ofValmy. He was accompanied on his journey byLiseur, a Luxembourg hussar. They travelled from Lorraine to the Grand Duchy without encountering any major problems.
During his second spell in Luxembourg,Goethetook the time to describe in full the charm of the fortress of Luxembourg. But what impressed this man of letters the most wasthe liberty pole in Schengen, located at the Luxembourg-Franco-German border; the pole was topped with a Phrygian cap and bore the inscription "Passers-by, this land is free".Goethemade a watercolour painting of this pole and the surrounding landscape.
The'Goethememorial stone'on the Rock in the Bock in Clausen commemorates the period the great German poet stayed in Luxembourg. The monument was erected in 1935 upon the request of the "Assoss" Luxembourg students' association. The medallion and inscription are the work of the Luxembourg sculptorAlbertKratzenberg.
Victor Hugo(1802-1885)
Victor Hugowas enamoured with Luxembourg. Likewise, Luxembourg was captivated byVictor Hugo. Those who require further proof only need to visit the house where the French writer resided during hispolitical exile in the Grand Duchy in 1871. The residence, which is located in Vianden in the north of country, on the German border, was transformed into a museum in 1935. At present, visitors can delve into the life of this great poet.
Victor Hugovisited the Grand Duchy on several occasions between 1862 and 1865. On his travels, he explored several parts of the country including Clervaux, Vianden, Echternach andLarochette.
On 30 May 1871, Hugo was expelled from Belgium for having offered political asylum to members of the Paris Commune. Unable to return to France, due to his opposition to Napoleon III,the poet took refuge in Viandenand stayed there for several months.
Clearly,Victor Hugowas enchanted with this picturesque village and fell in love with its charm. He wrote:Today, in its splendid landscape that one day will host visitors from all over Europe, Vianden consists of two equally reassuring and magnificent things: one sinister - its ruin, the other joyful - its inhabitants.
In memory of its host, the city of Vianden placed abust of this great manof letters opposite the museum; the bust was created by the French sculptorAuguste Rodin. On the facade of his former dwelling, a plaque reads: “It is in this house, from 8 June to 23 August 1871, that Victor Hugo resided during his fifth and final visit to Vianden”.
Wilhelm Voigt(1849-1922)
Wilhelm Voigt, the son of a cobbler, was born on 13 February 1849 inTilsitin eastern Prussia, a town close toKaliningrad, directly on the Lithuanian border. At the age of 14, he was sentenced to 14 days in prison for theft. This, it seems, proved to be an ominous precursor because between 1864 and 1891 he was convicted four times for theft and twice for forgery; consequently, he spent many years in prison. In 1890, he tried to steal the treasure from the court of Wongrowitz and was subsequently sentenced to 15 years behind bars.
However,Wilhelm Voigtwas to become famous thanks to the movieThe Captain ofKöpenick, starringHeinz Rühmann, which recounts his grandest stroke of genius. On 16 October 1906,he masqueraded as a Prussian captainand arrested the mayor at theBerlin-Köpenicktown hall in order to steal the city's treasure.
He was detained and sentenced to prison. Later, he was pardoned by the emperor William II andgiven early releasefromTegelprison on 16 August 1908. The whole of Germany expressed amusement at his genial masterplan. According to a report from a correspondent in theDaily Mail, the emperor referred to the guilty man as a 'great guy'.
Upon his release from prison,Wilhelm Voigtspent 12 years of his life in exile in Luxembourg city. He worked as a waiter, cobbler and even played the role ofCaptainKöpenickin a circus.
Wilhelm Voigtis buried in the Grand Duchy. His tomb is located in theNotre-Damecemeteryin the district of Limpertsberg. The inscription on the gravestone reads: "HAUPTMANN VON KOEPENICK".
Ernest Hemingway (1899-1961)
The famous American writer Ernest Hemingway visitedLuxembourg on two occasions: the first time for the Liberation and the second time at the end of theBattle of the Ardennes. He came to the country as awar correspondentand reported from the Luxembourg front for the American magazineColliersin December 1944.
The distinguished author ofThe Old Man and the Seawanted to chronicle the liberation, from the landing of the allied forces to their entry into German-held territories.
On 17 December 1944, in a convoy of eight journalists on route from Paris,Hemingway arrived at the American headquarters in Luxembourg city. He travelled to the command post of the 22nd American infantry regiment, which was located in an old converted mill in Rodenbourg, a small village between Junglinster and Betzdorf in the east of the country.
From the hillside close to Breidweiler and Consdorf, he observed the American army in combat. His article on the heavy fighting in the region around Echternach, Berdorf, Lauterborn, Osweiler and Dickweiler was published inTime & Lifemagazine in January 1945. Hemingway returned to Paris in early January of the same year.
Amemorial stone in Rodenbourgcommemorates the presence in the Grand Duchy of this great writer who was awarded theNobel prize for literature in 1954.
Last update02.06.2025
For more information
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Top 5: Bridges that must be crossed
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/battle-bulge.html
Battle of the Bulge: War rears its ugly head one last time in Luxembourg
On 16 December 1944, German units attacked the American front line in the Ardennes, which covered the North of Luxembourg and the East of Belgium. It was the prelude to one of the bloodiest battles of the Second World War: the Battle of the Bulge. Thousands of American and German soldiers lost their lives in the unforgiving combats that took place in one of the harshest winters in known history. In January 1945, as the fighting stopped with the German retreat, a significant part of the Luxembourg region ofEislekwas left in ruins and many of its inhabitants had died, become refugees or were shivering in the cold, clawing at the shreds of their existence.
A battle that is vividly remembered to this day
The winter of 1944-1945 is remembered by many people in Luxembourg as one of thecoldest and harshest in records. The only advantage the weather conditions brought with them was a lull in combat, in early December 1944, as opposing German and US forces equally seemed to be struggling with the conditions. WhenGerman troops advanced through the valleys and over the snow-covered crests on 16 December 1944, the surprise was total. The "Battle of the Bulge" caught the US troops by surprise, throwing them back towards the West and inflicting  a heavy toll.
Towns which, so far, had been spared by the war, suddenly found themselves heavily fought over.Wiltz, Clervaux, Diekirch, Ettelbruck, Beaufort and Echternach, quiet towns and villages that are today attracting tourists, became instrumental in delaying the German advance, resulting in heavy house-to-house fighting. Outlying farms and small hamlets were sometimes obliterated in the artillery barrages, where attackers tried to dislodge defenders. During the heavy fighting,many residents became refugees, while those who remained were often trapped in basements without knowing whether they would survive the night.
Towards the end of January 1945, Americans troops, led by general George S. Patton, regained control over the region.On 12 February 1945, the last Luxembourgish town, Vianden, was eventually liberated, effectively ending German rule in Luxembourg.
The battle remains an important part of Luxembourg's collective memory to this day. Many memorials and museums dot the landscape, from theNational Museum of Military Historyin Diekirch and theBattle of the Bulge Museum in Wiltz, to local memorials to downed allied aircraft or important battles, e.g. at theNational Liberation Museum atSchumanns-Eck, a strategically important crossroads, where German and US troops clashed for weeks.
Lest we forget...
Even though there are fewer and fewer witnesses from that period, the silent witnesses of the battle continue to speak to us. For example, in the Eislek region, the facades of old buildings are still peppered by shell holes and it is not uncommon to find ammunition, military equipment or mortal remains over 80 years after the famous battle. Among the most impressive locations is theAmerican military cemetery in Hamm, where more than 5,073 American soldiers who were killed in Luxembourg are buried.
Among the fallen soldiers lies the famousUS General George S. Patton. He died after a car crash in Germany and was buried on 24 December 1945 in Hamm, in accordance with his request to be laid to rest alongside his men. Other notable tombs include that ofMedal of HonorrecipientsSergeant Day G. TurnerandPrivate William D. McGee, as well as five members of the famousE Company, 506th Regiment, 101st Airborne Divisionportrayed in the book and seriesBand of Brothers.
An "AmericanSaint Nick"for the children of Wiltz
In December 1944,Richard W. Brookinswas stationed in Wiltz with the 28th US Infantry Division.As St Nicholas Day approached, he and his fellow soldiers realised thatLuxembourgers had little to offer their children after almost five years of war, so they decided to organise a special treat. They gathered sweets from their food supplies and the army cooks also helped out, and on 5 December,"American Saint Nick"paraded through Wiltz in a jeep, much to the delight of the local children.This gave rise to atradition that has taken place in Wiltz ever since.
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
The Second World War
Our Lady of Fatima Pilgrimage: Honoring Heritage and Faith
Éislek: adventure awaits
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/helm-holy-roman-empire.html
At the helm of the Holy Roman Empire
Following a period of regional development, the Counts of Luxembourg were in a strong position within the Roman Empire. In 1308, Henry VII was elected Emperor of the Holy Empire, an honour borne by two other counts of the House of Luxembourg after him. However, this era was short-lived: in the mid 15th century, the Duchy of Luxembourg was in great debt, subject to a struggle between France and the Holy Empire, resulting in its collapse.
Luxembourgers holding the reins of the Holy Empire
In theearly 14th century, Luxembourg was one of most the influential dynasties in Europe.The Counts of Luxembourg reigned over a key territory located between the Holy Empire and France, which was much further away than the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg's current borders. They were skilful negotiators andpursued a policy of alliances and regional expansion.
In 1308, CountHenry VII was elected King of the Romansby the prince-electors at the instigation of his brother Baudouin, archbishop of Trier, and by Pierre d’Aspelt, archbishop of Mayence, also of Luxembourg origin. A papal legate crowned himEmperor of the Holy Empire in Rome in 1312.Yet he never came back from this Italian excursion. He died of malaria in 1313 and was buried in Pisa.
After Henry VII, two other members of the dynasty of Luxembourg bore the imperial crown:
The last knight of Europe
The most symbolic member of the dynasty was John, the son of Henry VII.
Blind towards the end of his life, Jean of Bohemia, called 'the Blind' (1296-1346)was aninspiring individual of his times. He was an iconic figure of the Middle Ages and had sworn allegiance to both the Holy Roman Emperor and the French King. He was in some ways a proto-European; he took part in all the great campaigns and battles of his era. Heembodied chivalrous ideals more than any other contemporary figure: he travelled throughout Europe on horseback, from Paris to Prague, from Lithuania to Italy, to achieve his idea of political order in Europe.
He was also avirtuoso of the exchange rate and financial market. He succeeded in enlarging the territory significantly through a system of pledging and bargaining of seigneurial rights.
Losing his sight did not affect his ambitions. And when his allegiance sworn to the French King resulted in his being called to take up arms against the English, he did not back down. Despite his handicap, heset out to do battle at Crecy in 1346. He was guided by his knights, but was fatally wounded in the midst of the fray.
Legend has it that Edward of Woodstock, Prince of Wales - the Black Prince - came across John's body after the battle and, impressed by the man's commitment and to honour his dead adversary, adopted his crest and hismottoIch dien(Iserve), which to this day forms part of the coat of arms of the heir to the British throne(currently Prince William).
In Luxembourg, Jean the Blind is also well known for havingsigned the founding deed to theSchueberfouer,in 1340. This trade fair became a funfair in the 19th century, one of the largest and most visited in Europe. Taking place every year during three weeks at the end of summer, it attracts some 2 million visitors. The original document fir Jean the Blind's seal can be seen at theLëtzebuerg City Museum.
Luxembourg in ruins
But he  left behind aprecarious financial situationwhich led the country to bankruptcy.
In fact, Elisabeth of Goerlitz (1390-1451), the last Duchess of Luxembourg, was but a dowager Duchess. In 1441, living in opulence and grappling with debt,she sold Luxembourg against the will of her people to Philip II the Good, Duke of Burgundy. Consequently, Luxembourg City only gave up after it was captured  andransacked by Philip II's troops in 1443. Until the 19th century, the territory was occupied by the various European powers.
Last update26.08.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's origins
400 years of foreign sovereigns
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/steel-industry-luxembourg.html
The steel industry and Luxembourg
Between the mid-19th Century and the late 20th Century, the country's fate was intrinsically linked to the steel industry. It brought fortune to the country and its population, and left a significant mark on Luxembourg's economy, society and landscapes. From 1975, its decline forced the country to diversify itself, but especially contributed to the creation of a 'Luxembourgish social model'.
Humble beginnings
Initially, Luxembourg was anagricultural countrywith outdated structures. It was home to a handful of small industries – tanneries, textile plants, potteries, traditional forges, paper mills, breweries – but these were scattered and not large in scale.
In 1842, the Grand Duchy became amember of theZollverein, the German Customs Union.This union, which provided access to the market across the Rhine, proved to be beneficial for Luxembourg. In fact, Germany supplied it with the capital and labour required to develop its heavy industry.
But in order for economic trade to take place, good communication routes were necessary. Theconstruction of the railway lines– the first connection from Luxembourg to Thionville was inaugurated in 1859 – was a national event that was made immortal in the song DeFeierwon(the fiery chariot).
A steel industry giant
Membership in theZollvereinand the construction of the railway network created favourable conditions for economic takeoff. But it wasthe discovery of iron ore depositsin the south of the country during the early 1840s that allowed Luxembourg to launch its industrial revolution.
Large industrial complexes were built around the city of Luxembourg, but especially in the South,some remains of which can still be admired today. Esch-sur-Alzette, Schifflange, Dudelange and other villages of the pre-industrial era saw a real population boom.
On the eve of the First World War, Luxembourg ranked among the world’s six largest producers. In 1911, several companies fused to createARBED (Aciéries réunies de Burbach, Eich et Dudelange / Integrated steelworks of Burbach, Eich and Dudelange), which became the main player of the Luxembourg steel industry
A country of immigration
Industrialisation changes the demographic and social structures of the country. The farmers of the Oesling, the northern part of the country, abandoned their land to work in the mines and factories.
Local labour, however, was not sufficient.From 1890 onwards, emigration practically stopped and Luxembourg became a country of immigration.There are several waves of immigration: first the Germans, then the Italians and more recently, starting from the 1960s, the Portuguese. In 1910, immigrants already represented 15.3% of the total population. Today,they account for nearly 50%.
Steel history as lived by ordinary people
The virtual exhibitionMinett Storiesinvites visitors to explore the history of the region's industrialisation from the late 19th century through to the steel crisis of the 1970s and the subsequent gradual deindustrialisation. The approach moves away from the usual narratives of large ironworks and steel barons to focus onthe life stories of ordinary people who lived in the region, often mine workers, theMinettsdäpp.
The exhibition explores the multiple - and sometimes contested - identities of the region through21 stories. It uses various forms of transmedia storytelling, all of which are available online: a radio play, graphic novels, documentaries and videos, interactive maps and historical essays. Acollection of historical sourcesis also available on the Minett Stories website.
The exhibition is part of theRemixing Industrial Pasts in the Digital Ageproject of the LuxembourgCentre for Contemporary and Digital History at the University of Luxembourg. Launched as part of Esch2022, it will be online well beyond this cultural year.
Identity Disputes: The Image of Life in the Minett (Minett Stories) (Video/Audio YouTube)
The economic sector's dominion
However, the prevalence of the steel industry was dangerous for a small country like Luxembourg. In 1970, this sector represented 27.9% of the sum of added values in Luxembourg. In other words, over a quarter of Luxembourg's wealth was derived from these steelworks.
From the late 1950s onwards, Luxembourg made major efforts to diversify its economy. Thanks to promotion missions abroad, other industries were attracted to Luxembourg, such as Goodyear or DuPont de Nemours. At the same time, the tertiary sector considerably gained in importance. While the sum of added values in the tertiary sector accounted for 38% in 1958, it went up to 77% in 1995. Today, 88% of Luxembourg's wealth comes from the service sector, including almost a third in financial services.
A consensual social model against the crisis
But no one could have prepared the country for the events that unfolded in the period between 1975 and 1985. Thefull force ofthe global economic crisis was felt by the Luxembourg economy. At the same time, the steel industry faced overproduction around the world. Given the collapse of demand and the drop in prices, reducing production seemed to be the only solution. In 1985, only 13,400 people worked in the steel industry - half as many as in 1974.
In the face ofthousands of dismissals and in order to avoid socialconflict, the Luxembourg government established the Tripartite Coordination Committee. The committee made employers, employees and public authorities gather around the same table. In 1979, it reached an agreement through which the steel industry was restructured and modernised.
TheTripartite - as this model for consultation is known in Luxembourg- was perpetuated and is currently at the heart of 'Luxembourg's social model'. With this model, partners commit to respond to social and economic problems by seeking consensual solutions together.
What about today?
In 2002, ARBED merged with Aceralia and Usinor to form the largest steel industry conglomerate in the world: Arcelor. In 2006, the group merged with giant Mittal Steel, creatingArcelor Mittal. The group's headquarters remained in Luxembourgandseveral production sites continue to supply theglobal market with steel products. From Doha to Copenhagen and from Sicily's vineyards to New York's One World Trade Center,Luxembourgish products are used across the whole world.
Since the early 20th Century and after a long-term decline, the weight of the steel industry in Luxembourg's economy has become stable. Now only approximately 2% of the sum of added values is created by the steel sector.
Last update14.05.2025
For more information
First World War
A country's renaissance
Openness to the world
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/fondation-du-luxembourg.html
Luxembourg's origins
Lucilinburhuc, the 'small castle' first mentioned in a deed in 963, constitutes the very roots of Luxembourg. It was perched on a rocky outcrop and surrounded by forests, pastures and legends. A wise marriage policy, some acquisitions and military conflicts allowed the county to become a major regional power in the early 13th century.
Once upon a time, there was a small castle
Luxembourg's origins were modest but promising.In 963, Count Siegfried, the youngest son of an Ardennes Count and with no significant endowment,acquired acastellumon a rocky outcrop and surrounded by forests and pastures from the St Maximin Abbey in Trier– today this is called the 'Bock'.
The small castle was located in the vicinity of the former Roman road going from Reims to Trier and surrounded by fertile land.It prospered  quickly and developed into a real economic, political and religious centre.
Rapid expansion
From the 12th century, Luxembourg could really be referred to as a town.It became an economic, political and religious regional centrewith ambitions stretching far beyond the heights and valleys surrounding it.
In fact, the Counts of Luxembourg succeededin increasing their wealth rapidly through marriages, land purchase, ties of vassalage and war,if needed. They defeated their rivals, despite suffering occasional setbacks, such as the Battle of Worringen (1288), during which Count Henry VI and three of his brothers fell, mortally wounded.
In the late 13th  century, the County of Luxembourg occupied a vast area between the Meuse and the Moselle rivers. with the particularity of straddling thelinguistic border, with one part being German-speaking, the other French-speaking.
Beautiful Melusine
A number of legends surround the foundation of the city. The most well-known of these is the story of thesiren called Melusina, a mythical figure of the Middle Ages which can be found in various European regions.
Count Siegfried had married her under one condition.Before the wedding, she had demanded to have one day per week during which no one, including her husband, would be allowed to see her.
A few years went by and Siegfried's curiosity became stronger and stronger, until one day, he looked through the keyhole. He was struck by the sight of his beautiful Melusine with a fish tail!He had married a mermaid.He was so astounded by what he saw that he shrieked and Melusine realised that her secret had been revealed. She  jumped out of the windowonto the Bock cliff and disappeared with a thunderclap.
Last update14.05.2025
For more information
At the helm of the Holy Roman Empire
A country's renaissance
The Second World War
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/400-ans-occupation.html
400 years of foreign sovereigns
Luxembourg was integrated into the Netherlands and often changed sovereignties from the 16th to 19th centuries. From the 15th to the 17th century, the Duchy belonged to the Habsburgs. In the early 18th century, Luxembourg was given to the Austrian branch of the Habsburgs before it was taken over by revolutionary France in the early 19th century. It finally gained its independence after the King of the Netherlands took control of the territory. Through the centuries, the Duchy lost some of its territories and started to appear in its current form.
Under Spanish hegemony
Luxembourg had astrategic position on the European chessboard. From the 16th century onwards, the country was drawn into the numerous wars fought for the hegemony in Europe by the Spanish Habsburgs and the Valois, and finally the Bourbons of France.
Indeed, Luxembourg represented animportant part of the net that the Spain of the Habsburgs wanted to cast over France.Boasting one of the most formidable fortresses of its time, France saw Luxembourg as a spur in its flank.
A disputed fortress
The 1659 Treaty of the Pyrenees marked the endof the war between France and Spain. The treaty was not without implications for the Duchy, as it lost its southern territories that included the now French cities of Thionville and Longwy.
But peace was short-lived: in1684, the French troops of Louis XIV besieged thecity and captured it. After capturing the city, the French engineer Vauban, who led the siege operations, carried out extensive fortification works. For a short period of time, from 1684 to 1697, the Duchy of Luxembourg remained under the French regime before it was returned to the Habsburgs.
During the 13 years under the French regime,Vauban redesigned the fortifications of Luxembourg, which became a formidable fortress reputed to be impregnable.
Austria holds the reins
In 1715, following the War of the Spanish Succession, the southern Netherlands passed to theAustrian branch of the Habsburgs.
The 18th century was a period of peace and prosperity. Luxembourg benefits from the ideals of enlightened despotism advocated by the Austrian Empress Maria Theresa and her son, Emperor Joseph II. The reforms, such as the Theresian land register introducing fiscal equality and the edict of toleration granting non-Catholics the freedom of religion, already signalled the innovations of the French Revolution.
War and insurgency
In 1795, French revolutionary troops besieged the fortress andLuxembourg was annexed to Franceas the Département des Forêts (Forests Department). The reforms that were brought about by the new regime were not popular and the introduction of conscription, a system of compulsory military recruitment, set off the powder keg. Indeed, it triggered apeasant uprising known as theKlëppelkrich(Cudgel War) in 1798, during which hundreds of poorly equipped peasants fought against French troops. Within two days, the uprising was eventually suppressed. 200 Luxembourgers died in the battles and 35 were put to death.
Under Napoleon, themore moderate French regime was more widely accepted by the population, in particular because the Civil Code that was introduced under him, known as the Napoleon Code, granted greater freedoms to the bourgeoisie. Consequently, a class of entrepreneurs began to emerge, which, at the end of the Napoleonic Empire, opposed the takeover of authority by the nobility and the clergy.
Following the Napoleonic wars, thefortress was liberated in 1814. In a difficult political climate, the question arose again: what to do with the Duchy of Luxembourg?
Finally – but not quite – independent
At the1815 Vienna Congress, the great powers prepared a post-Napoleonic Europe. The Duchy of Luxembourg wasformally declared independent, but was placed under the control of the Netherlands, another newly established entity. Now elevated to the rank of Grand Duchy, the country lost some of its eastern land, such as Bitburg, to Prussia. Luxembourgbecame a member of the German Confederation, while the capital became a federal fortress and home to a Prussian garrison.
Thus, even as a formally independent and neutral country, Luxembourg still remained dominated by foreign powers. Nonetheless, a national sentiment began to grow amongst the population, though not without consequences.
Last update14.05.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's origins
At the helm of the Holy Roman Empire
A country's renaissance
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/ouverture-monde.html
Openness to the world
At the end of World War II, Luxembourg abandoned its status of neutrality, which did not protect it against two invasions, and guaranteed a place for itself in the international communities formed after 1945. With an understanding that peace is built through unity, the country became a founding member of all the major international organisations and an ardent advocate of the European construction.
Abandoning neutrality
The Grand Duchyis a founding member of all the post-war multilateral cooperation institutions:
However,the decisive opening up of the country took place within the framework of European unification.When France's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Robert Schuman, launched his plan outlining the creation of a European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1950, Luxembourg was directly involved. With great skill, its diplomats succeeded in securing the provisional seat of the High Authority of the ECSC in Luxembourg City in 1952. The creation of the ECSC placed the main resource of the Grand Duchy, namely its steel industry, under the control of a supranational authority. This represented a risk, but also an opportunity for Luxembourg, since its significant steel production allowed it to become a fully-fledged member of the Community bodies.
In 1957, Luxembourg was a signatory of the Treaties of Rome, which founded the European Economic Community (EEC) and regulated the use of nuclear energy (Euratom). In the negotiations, the government managed to have the principle of legal equality accepted for all states, even the smallest, and to obtain direct representation in the European Institutions.
Luxembourg, capital of Europe
Since 1965, Luxembourg is one of the three capitals of the European Union, alongside Brussels and Strasbourg. Luxembourg City is home to a number of important Community institutions: the Secretariat General of the European Parliament, the Court of Justice, the European Investment Bank, various units of the European Commission, the European Court of Auditors, the Publications Office, etc.
To host the institutions and thousands of personnel, anew district is built outside Luxembourg City. TheKirchberg districtis today synonymous with the European Institutions and has become one of the economic centres of the country, as well as an architectural gem.
Ardent Europeans
Its small size has not prevented the Grand Duchy from playing anactive role in the construction of Europe.
Prime Minister Pierre Werner (1913-2002) can be considered as one of the forefathers of the euro.Appointed head of a group of experts, he presented a monetary union project (Werner Plan) to the European Commission as early as 1970. The monetary union saw the light as a result of this plan, which ultimately led to the creation of the euro.
Three Luxembourg statesmen, Gaston Thorn (1981-1985), Jacques Santer (1995-1999) and Jean-Claude Juncker (2014-2019)have presided over the European Commissionto date.
Jean-Claude Junckeralso distinguished himself as President of the Eurogroup from 2005 to 2013.
The country's relationship with the EU is marked by two more distinctions:
Last update02.06.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's origins
The steel industry and Luxembourg
The Second World War
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/renaissance-dun-pays.html
A country's renaissance
The period from the 16th to the 19th centuries is often seen as an era of foreign dominion. In contrast, the 1815 Vienna Congress is seen as contemporary Luxembourg's date of birth. However, the Grand Duchy was far from being fully independent and it is only in 1890 that it started existing under its own authority.
A small Grand Duchy
The collapse of the Napoleonic Empire of 1815 meant that Europe's map was divided once again. With the aim of erecting a barrier against France, the great powers brought together at the Congress of Vienna decided to create a great kingdom of the Netherlands.It was established as a grand duchy and assigned to the king of the Netherlands,Wilhelm I of Orange-Nassau, who henceforth also bore the title of grand duke.
The elevation in rank did not stopthe country from losing to Prussia a vast region situated to the east of the Moselle, the Sûre and the Our rivers.Luxembourg lost its regions in the Eifel, which are now known as the cities of Bitburg, Gerolstein and Daun.
About Prussia: The Congress of Vienna brought about an additional complication regarding the international status of the Grand Duchy. Indeed, Wilhelm I accepted that the GrandDuchy would become a member of the German Confederation,which consolidated 39 German states. However, Luxembourg's strength became a federal fortress maintained with German funds and home to a Prussian garrison.
Even though Luxembourg was independent on paper,Wilhelm I treated it as a Dutch province. While the Luxembourg people did not oppose this, the economic and in particular fiscal policies of the Dutch regime gave rise to a growing discontent among the population.
Long live the – Belgian – Revolution!
Therefore, it came as no surprise that theinhabitants of the Grand Duchy joined the Belgian insurgents when the Belgian Revolution broke out in 1830.Following Belgium’s declaration of independence on 4 October 1830, several Luxembourg representatives sat in the constituent assembly, and later in the institutions of the young Belgian state. Only the capital of the Grand Duchy remained under Dutch control, since it was protected by the Prussian garrison.
Keen to extinguish the revolutionary fire, the great powers decided to separate the Belgians and the Dutch by creating the Kingdom of Belgium, while dividing the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg between the two adversaries (Treaty of the Twenty-Four Articles dated 14 October 1831). The Belgian Parliament accepted, while Wilhelm I refused for eight years.
TheTreaty of London of 28 April 1839imposed the division. Henceforth, there weretwo Luxembourgs:
The demarcation line more or less followed the linguistic border, with the exception of the Arlon region. The 1839 treaty delineated the borders of the Grand Duchy, which have not changed since.
Towards an independent Luxembourg?
Wilhelm II broke away from his father's authoritarian style. Upon his visit of the country in 1841, he declared: 'I want Luxembourg to be governed by Luxembourgers.'
Gradually, thestructures of an independent state were to be put in place.As early as 1841, the king-grand duke granted a constitutional charter. A series of fundamental laws laid down community organisation, education, public charity and justice, while maintaining the Napoleonic Code. The country reaped economic benefits from itsZollvereinmembership, the German customs union, which was at the root of the development of the iron and steel industry and of the construction of railways.
From 1843, German and French were taught at school and Luxembourgish became a vernacular language with which most of the population of 170,000 people identified. The first steps towards a nation were made.
Yet soon after, peace found itself at risk of being disrupted.
Luxembourg at the heart of an international crisis
In 1866, the Austro-Prussian War triggered the dissolution of the German Confederation. Faced with the expansion of Prussia, France sought territorial compensation. Luxembourg seemed an easy prey.Napoleon III suggested a deal to the king-grand duke: the Grand Duchy for 5 million gold francs. William III (1849-1890) accepted the proposal, but Prussia, whose garrison still occupied the fortress of Luxembourg, opposed it.
'Luxembourg's crisis' was at risk of leading countries to a continental conflictof a scale that had never been seen before. TheTreaty of London (11th May 1867) reched a compromise. Prussia withdrew its garrison, the fortress was dismantled and the Grand Duchy was declared perpetually neutral under the guarantee of the signatory powers. In return, France renounced its territorial claims.
Towards a national dynasty
Wilhelm III was the last king grand-duke. In 1890, upon his death, his daughter Wilhelmina succeeded him on the Dutch throne. In Luxembourg, only male succession is provided for by the family pact. As a result,Adolf of Nassau-Weilbourg acceded to the Luxembourgish throne, thereby founding the reigning dynasty we know today.
Up until now, the dynastic bonds between the reigning houses of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg have contributed to friendlier relations between the three countries.
Last update02.06.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's origins
400 years of foreign sovereigns
First World War
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/second-world-war.html
The Second World War
The Second World War began for the Grand Duchy when German troops crossed the border on 10 May 1940.  Subjected to an intense process of Germanisation as well as the deportation of its Jewish population and the forced recruitment of its youth into Hitler's army, Luxembourg went through a harrowing ordeal, but never lost its fighting spirit, either in exile or at home. Liberated by American troops in September 1944, Luxembourg began to slowly recover from the damage caused by the occupation and the Battle of the Bulge.
Operation Thunderclap - 10 May 1940
When the first German units crossed the Moselle, Sûre and Our rivers on the morning of 10 May, they encountered acountry that was prepared for invasion albeit powerlessin the face of advancing the war machine. Following a few skirmishes, Luxembourg's armed forces had no choice but to surrender their weapons. The Grand Duchy's neutrality had been breached for a second time, in the space of less than 25 years.
Learning from the past, theGrand Duchess Charlotteand the Luxembourgish government, notified that very night of the invasion,escaped the country. Their first port of call was Portugal, then Canada. Finally, the Grand Ducal family and the government settled in London to foster Luxembourg's resistance.This proved to be a fortunate move, as their commitment to the Allies' cause ensured that Luxembourg was awarded full international recognition immediately after the war.
Luxembourg reorganised by the occupying forces
German occupation meant the end of Luxembourg's independence. Many Luxembourgers adopted await-and-see attitude and the Luxembourgish economy began to produce for theReich. In the absence of the government, an administrative committee was created, collaborating with German occupying forces in order to preserve the country's sovereignty.
However, the German plans were to annex Luxembourg to theReich. In July-August 1940,Luxembourg was placed under direct German administration. Gustav Simon, the Gauleiter ofGauKoblenz-Trier, was appointed head of the civil administration. With the support ofLuxembourgish collaborators(known asGielemännercher- the 'yellow men' - because of their brown-yellow uniform), the entire public sphere in Luxembourg was reorganised under German rule.
From the outset, these initiatives were aimed at ade facto annexation of Luxembourg to theReichand the Germanisation of its population. All the structures of the Luxembourg state were abolished. The use of French was forbidden and an intense propaganda campaign attempted to draw the local population over to the Nazi regime.
Roused by the allies' first victories, the Germanisation of society and deteriorating living conditions, an ever-increasing portion of the population began tooppose the German occupation.
Annexation into theReich
To legitimise Luxembourg's annexation into theReich, the occupying forces organised apopulation census in 1941, asking questions about the national, ethnic (Volkszugehörigkeit) and linguistic affiliation of each resident. On the last two points in particular, the German administration tried to force the local population to declare themselves ‘German’.  However, despite the propaganda, censorship and intimidation, a significant number of people answered ‘Luxembourgeois’ or left the fields blank.  The German civil administration soon realised that the census was not working in its favour and cancelled the collection of forms.  To this day, the census day on 10 October 1941 is celebrated asNational Commemoration Day.
On 30 August 1942, Germany establishedthe forced annexation of Luxembourg into Germany. A large number of Luxembourgers immediately suspected the consequences: young Luxembourgers were going to be treated as Germans, which meant that they would be required to carry out their military service.
This measure causedstrikes all over the country. The German response was severe. German authorities declared martial law and summarily executed 21 strikers by theStandgerichte, the Martial Courts. The movement was crushed.
Price to pay
Overall, around 10,000 Luxembourgers wereforcibly conscriptedinto the German armed forces. Over a third of them refused to wear the German uniform, driving them underground, often with disastrous consequences for their families. The occupying forces responded to any form of opposition with terror:deportations to the east, imprisonment in concentration camps (Hinzert camp in particular) and executions.
It was theJewish communitythat suffered the most at the hands of the Nazi regime. Of the 4,000 Jewish people living in Luxembourg before the war (approximately one fourth of which were Luxembourgers, the remaining being refugees from other European countries), over 90% never saw the country again. One-third were killed.
Groups of Luxembourgerswho sometimes came from the scouts or disbanded political partiesgradually organised themselves to fight against the occupation. In its initial stage, this 'Resistance' organised the smuggling of fugitives and allied aviators who escaped prison to French and Belgian resistance groups, as well as the dissimulation of Luxembourgish members of the resistance.
At the end of the war, the different resistance movements joined forces as theUnio’n.
An 'AmericanSaint Nick' for the children of Wiltz
In December 1944,Richard W. Brookinswas garrisoned in Wiltz with the 28th American Infantry Division. As St Nicholas Day approached, he and his fellow soldiers realised thatLuxembourgers had little to offer their children after almost five years of war, so they decided to organise a special St Nicholas Day. They gathered sweets from their food supplies and the army cooks also lent a helping hand. On 5 December,"American Saint Nick"paraded through Wiltz in a jeep, much to the delight of the local children.This gave rise to atradition that has taken place in Wiltz ever since.
Liberation at last...
On 10 September 1944, Luxembourg was liberated by the American army.Nevertheless, the Germans succeeded in stabilising the front along the Moselle and launched a counter-attack in December 1944. The Battle of the Bulge wreaked havoc in the north and east of the country.
The liberation of Vianden on 22 February, thereturn from exile of Grand Duchess Charlotteon 14 April and finally the unconditional surrender of Germany on 8 May 1945 marked the end of the war.
The final toll was high:as a result of the armed conflict and the Nazi terror, Luxembourg suffered 5,700 deaths, accounting for approximately 2% of the total population. From among the 1,300 Jews that had been deported, only 69 survived the ghettos and camps.
The immediate post-war period was characterised by reconstruction.Thanks to the American aid received as part of the Marshall Plan, significant progress was achieved in terms of modernisation and infrastructure. It was also a time to settle scores against the collaborators, via legal proceedings and sometimes via reprisals.
Last update17.10.2025
For more information
Openness to the world
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history/premire-guerre-mondiale.html
First World War
European powers had granted Luxembourg the status of an independent and neutral state in 1867. When German troops invaded Luxembourg in 1914, it was in violation of this neutrality. At the end of the conflict, the country was isolated and at risk of losing its independence.
War breaks out
On 2nd August 1914, the German columns entered the country, clearly breaching its neutrality. Despite theprotests of the government and the Grand Duchess Marie-Adelaïde,the Germans occupied all the country's key points, including the rail network. It was deemed indispensable for the German war effort, prized just as much as the iron and steel industry.
The German headquarters was set up in Esch-sur-Alzette, from which the capture of the Longwy fortress was coordinated. The occupation was limited to the military, while Luxembourg's political institutions remained untouched during the war.
In light of the news of massacres in Belgium, the government, led by the Minister of State Paul Eyschen, called for calm on the part of the Luxembourg population and continued to observe absolute neutrality towards all the parties involved in the conflict. As a result of this position,the allies made reproaches to Luxembourg in the wake of the hostilities.
Shortages and trade unions
During the occupation, themajor problem facing the population was the provision of supplies. The state of war rendered the importing of supplies to compensate for the insufficiencies of national production impossible. The government introduced rationing and imposed maximum prices to curb inflation. The result was a flourishing black market and a high level of tension between the cities and the countryside.
Shortages, price increases and loss of purchasing power triggeredsocial conflict. The dissatisfaction drove labourers to organise themselves into trade unions. In September 1916, the first two trade unions of the steel industry were born, one in Esch-sur-Alzette in the iron ore region, the other in the capital. Astrike broke out in the steel sector in 1917and was harshly repressed by the German army.
Fighting against Germany
From the start of the war, there were also some people who stood with the allies. Around3,000 Luxembourgers joined the ranks of the French Foreign Legionduring the war, including François Faber who won the Tour de France in 1909. Other Luxembourgers became citizens of their country of residence to join the regular troops in France, Belgium, Canada and the United States. A large number of them never saw their homes again.
Simultaneously, aBritish espionage networkwas created n Luxembourg. It played a major role in the defeat of the last great German offensive of 1918.
The end of independence?
As the hostilities subsided, Luxembourg was a country marked by seriousinternal dissensions and at risk of losing its independence.
TheGrand Duchess Marie-Adelaïde was criticisedby socialist and liberal parties for having had relations with the German Emperor Wilhelm II. Her favouritism of pre-war right-wing politics took on renewed relevance. On 9th January 1919, the volunteer corps (Luxembourg army) revolted and a committee of public safety declared Luxembourg a republic. French troops were required to disperse the crowds and arrest those behind the coup.
On an international level, the Luxembourg government also had to face criticism with regard to the Grand Duchess. France and Belgium were carrying out secret negotiations, which, at a certain time, madeplans to incorporate the Grand Duchy to Belgium.
Caught in the cross-fire between Luxembourg's public opinion and international schemes,Marie-Adelaïde decided to abdicate and let her younger sister Charlotte take the reinson 15th January 1919.
A referendum saves the country
With a view to defusing the crisis, the Luxembourgish government decided to organise adouble referendum on the form of the state (monarchy or republic) and on the country's economic directionfollowing the denunciation of theZollverein, the economic union dominated by Prussia, of which Luxembourg was a member since 1842. The aim of the referendum was two-fold: publicly assert the will of the Luxembourgers to remain independent - a principle backed by the President of the United States Woodrow Wilson - and strengthen the legitimacy of the new Grand Duchess.
The referendum was the first of its kind where all Luxembourgers participated. In fact,women were granted the right to vote in 1919.On 28th September 1919, a vast majority of people votedin favour of keeping the monarchy(80%) and for aneconomic union with France(73%). France, however, desisted and advised the Luxembourg government to turn towards Belgium. Following harsh negotiations, the agreement establishing the Belgian-Luxembourg Economic Union (UEBL in French) was signed in 1921.
The UEBL still exists today. While their cooperation was initially limited to the areas of economics and finance, it stretched further in 2004 by also encompassing administrative and political cooperation.
Last update02.06.2025
For more information
La Renaissance d'un pays
Deuxième Guerre mondiale
Ouverture sur le monde
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/languages/luxembourgish-language-history.html
Luxembourgish – a living language evolving through the ages
Everyone who lives or works in the Grand Duchy will encounter Luxembourgish on a daily basis, whether at home, in the workplace or online. What was once just a dialect is now a language in its own right – and the national language of a multilingual country.
What is Luxembourgish?
Luxembourgish is aWest Central German language belonging to the Moselle Franconian group. It is closely related to the Rhenish dialects of German – known as the "Rhenish fan" – but has also absorbed many influences from French over the course of its history. The result is a living language in which words from both linguistic worlds exist side by side – sometimes even in the same everyday situation.
Until the 19th century, Luxembourgish was primarily a spoken language used by the lower classes. The bourgeoisie, nobility and clergy – and later the industrialists as well – all spoke French or German. The first literary works, such asDe Reenert(1872),De Feierwon(1859) andOns Heemecht(1864), did not emerge until the mid-19th century. The latter is a poem by the writer Michel Lentz. It was later set to music, and its first and fourth stanzas becameLuxembourg's national anthem.
Language and national identity
Over time, a strong sense of national identity developed, closely linked to the Luxembourgish language. This was further reinforced by historical events such as the German occupation during World War II and social changes in the 1960s and 1970s.
In 1912, Luxembourgish was mentioned in legislation for the first time.After 1945, the first steps were taken to codify the language– in other words, to establish a standard grammar and pronunciation.French influences were deliberately favoured in response to the German occupation.
In the decades that followed, the number of Luxembourgish-language publications grew. The language also became firmly established in the education system.
Official recognition
In 1984, a law was passed to officially recognise Luxembourgish as the national language. In the parliamentary debates on this subject, Luxembourgish was used for the first time in the plenary meeting. Today, it is the most common language there. A further milestone camewhenLuxembourgish was enshrined in the constitutionon 1 July 2023. Article 4 states as follows:
The language of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is Luxembourgish. The use of Luxembourgish, French and German is governed by law.
The status, growth and development of the Luxembourgish language have been supported by various measures in recent times: For example, theLaw of 2018 on the promotion of the Luxembourgish languageled to the creation of theCommissioner for the Luxembourgish Languageand theZenter fir d'Lëtzebuerger Sprooch(ZLS, Centre for the Luxembourgish language). In addition, a legal reform was implemented for the National Institute for Languages (Institut national des langues Luxembourg, INLL) in 2022. That same year, the government also approved a comprehensive 50-point action plan to promote the Luxembourgish language.
Where and when is Luxembourgish spoken (schwätzen) and written (schreiwen)?
Today, Luxembourgish is used in many areas of daily life – but the language also faces some challenges.In UNESCO's World Atlas of Endangered Languages, it is currently classified as "potentially endangered". This is mainly due to Luxembourg's multilingual environment:in the workplace, French and English often dominateas the working languages, while the use of Luxembourgish varies greatly depending on the economic sector.
Luxembourgish as an everyday language
Nevertheless, Luxembourgish is still the first language of most residents. According to the2021 census, nearly 49% of the population speak Luxembourgish – more than Portuguese or French. German ranks sixth. Although the proportion of Luxembourgish speakers is declining due to demographic change, the absolute number continues to grow.
How and when Luxembourgish is spoken depends very much on the context. According to a study, over 61% of the population use the language in their daily life – whether at home, at school or in the workplace. The number of people learning Luxembourgish as a second or foreign language is also constantly rising.
Luxembourgish in written form
Written Luxembourgish is likewise becoming more widespread, especially due to its increasing use as a common language on social media and messaging apps . Luxembourgish received a major boostin 2008 with the new law for obtaining citizenship, which requires applicants to pass a proficiency test in the language. Interest in language courses rose sharply as a result, and the number ofclasses offered by the National Institute for Languagesmore than tripled between 2008 and 2022.
Regional diversity: dialects and varieties
Alongside the standardised form, there aremany regional and local varieties of Luxembourgish, some of which are still in use today. This diversity is documented by theVariatiounsatlas, an interactive project by the University of Luxembourg. Based on more than 250,000 responses from the appSchnëssen(Luxembourgish for "chat"), the atlas documents over 700 linguistic differences, offering an impressive insight into the country's linguistic landscape.
Luxembourgish beyond the country's borders
Luxembourgish is not just spoken in the Grand Duchy. It is also used in neighbouring regions such as the east of Belgium's Luxembourg province, in the northwest of the French département of Moselle and along the border between Germany and Luxembourg.
Due tohistorical developments, Luxembourgish is even encountered overseas: emigration to Romania in the 9th and 14th centuries and to the United States in the 19th century carried the language to Transylvania and the American Midwest. Some of these varieties have survived to this day.
Last update12.03.2026
For more information
Introduction to Luxembourgish
Multilingualism as an opportunity for our society
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/languages/multilingualism-opportunity.html
Multilingualism as an opportunity for our society
Here's a situation that you might actually encounter in Luxembourg: you might interrupt a conversation in Luxembourgish to order your croissant in French, just to find out the barista is actually English. Switching between languages is an art in which Luxembourgers excel, taking an idea from one language and an expression from another at will. What might seem to you like a language jungle has actually helped shape an open society, a dynamic economy and Luxembourg's strong European commitment.
Multilingualism as a vector of cohesion
Growing up with a host of languages is normal for every child living in Luxembourg. Students learn German, French and English at school as mandatory languages and have the choice of learning other languages as well. Moreover,children encounter many other languages as part of their daily lives, through friends with different backgrounds and taking part in society in general.
Luxembourgish, French,German, English and Portuguese are among the most popular languages, but Italian, Spanish, Polish, Swedish, Finnish, Romanian and many other languages enrich the country's society every day.
This showcases Luxembourg as acountry whose society is open to many different cultures and nationalitiesand incorporates this multiculturalism like few other societies do.
Indeed, Luxembourg's resolute multilingualism has enabled not onlyto integrate many immigrants during the last 150 years, but italso serves as avector of social cohesion. In speaking such a large array of languages, many Luxembourgers and foreign nationals living in Luxembourg can easily communicate, reducing the danger of social exclusion based on language.
Contrary to what you might believe,the Luxembourgish has actually benefited from this multilingualenvironment. Indeed, the number of Luxembourgish classes is at an all-time high and through social media, the language is being used more than ever. Targeted measures are also delivering results, especially the2017 strategy for the promotion of the Luxembourgish language. The aim of the strategy is to work towards the standardisation of the Luxembourgish language and to promote awareness of Luxembourg's language and culture.
Languages bridge the divides between nations
On theglobal political stage, mastery of two, if not three major European languages– German, French and English – has allowed the Grand Duchy to be at the forefront of the European construction process. There is the example ofRobert Schuman, Luxembourg-born French Foreign Minister, who is also known as the "father of Europe": he considered that his upbringing in Luxembourg and his multinational background contributed greatly to his post-war commitment towards a united Europe.
As a proof of its commitment, three former Luxembourg Prime Ministers have been presidents of theEuropean Commission:GastonThorn (1981-1985),JacquesSanter(1995-1999), andJean-ClaudeJuncker(2014-2019).
Luxembourg, EU centre of excellence in multilingualism
Moreover, Luxembourg, along with Brussels and Strasbourg, isone of the three EU capitals.Renowned for its excellence in multilingualism and its European commitment for a long time, Luxembourg has come to be home to a substantial share of theEU institutions' translation and interpretation services.
The following services are based in Luxembourg:
The 2,500 linguists employed here work tirelessly to translate documents from and into the 24 official EU languages, as well as some non-EU languages,thereby creating a basis for mutual understanding.
Languages as an economic factor
Multilingualism is alsoa prominent feature of Luxembourg's economy, and has enabled the country to grow over the decades, from an agricultural society in the 1800s, to an internationally renowned financial and research and development hub in the 21st century.
Companies from all over the world have established their global or European headquarters in Luxembourg, enriching Luxembourg's already multicultural society with Indian, English, American and many other expat communities.
This multilingual environment might be a challenge at first,but many employers encourage employees to learn new languages, an investment which presents an opportunity in the long term.
Last update25.09.2025
For more information
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Multilingual literature
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/languages/introduction-letzebuergesch.html
Introduction to Luxembourgish
Have you ever heard Luxembourgish? This charming language, which is widely spoken in the Luxembourg region, bears similarities to the Rhenish dialects of western Germany. It has moreover been influenced by French and other languages over time. Luxembourgish is firmly established alongside German, French and English in everyday life: whether in shops and cafés or when chatting with locals, you will be surprised how often you hear the language – and how many opportunities there are to speak it yourself. That's why we have put together a list of common words and expressions that you can easily learn and try out yourself.
Luxembourgers really appreciate it when people make an effort to learn their language. Even if you only know a few words or short phrases, a simple "Moien" or "Wannechgelift" can go a long way. Below, we have provided some of the most common words, phrases and expressions to help you get started.
Saying yes – and sometimes no, too
Yes:Joor Yes
No:Neen
Sure:Sécher dat!
Of course:Kloer!
Absolutely not:Op kee Fall!
Greetings
Hello:Moien,Bonjour,Salut,Halloor Hey
Good morning:Gudde Moien
Good evening:Nowend
Pleased to meet you:Enchantéiert
Saying goodbye
Bye:Äddi,Salut, Ciao orAwuer
Good night:Gutt Nuecht
Have a nice day:E schéinen Dag nach
Apologising
I'm sorry:Et deet mir leed
I apologise:Ech entschëllege mech
Excuse me:Pardon!
Excuse me: Sorry!
Where can you learn Luxembourgish?
Have we sparked your interest? Would you like to find out more? Here are a few links to online and offline learning resources:
These online tools will help you with your writing:
Please and thank you
Please:WannechgeliftorWann s du wëlls
Thank you:Merci
Many thanks:VillmoolsMerci
You're welcome:Gär geschitt
Asking how someone is
How are you?:Wéi geet et?
Everything ok?:Alles ok?
Are you well?:Geet et gutt?
You alright?:Alles an der ReiorÇa va?
All good:Alles an der Rei,Alles okorÇa va!
Expressing annoyance
Damn:Nondikass,Djö,Nondidjö,TjëftouNondidjëft
What makes Luxembourgish so special?
Luxembourgish is more than just a dialect – it is a true linguistic treasure!The language is rooted in the Moselle Franconian dialects of western Germany, but it has also absorbedinfluences from throughout Europe over the years.  The result? This has given rise to a richly diverse language that bridges history and modern life.
Luxembourg's eventful past, marked by shifting powers and major waves of migration, has created a unique linguistic mix. Today, Luxembourgish reflects not only the country's cultural openness but also its commitment to a united Europe.  Luxembourgish is an official language alongside German and French. But Portuguese, Italian, English and Spanish are also widely spoken, as are languages from Scandinavia and the Balkans.
Luxembourgish is spoken mainly in the Grand Duchy and in the Areler Land (Arlon) region in Belgium. The language also lives on in some former emigrant regions, such as the American Midwest and parts of Romania. Andthanks to text messaging, social media and growing integration, Luxembourgish is increasingly evolving into a written language– one that is dynamic, modern and closely linked to everyday life.
Luxembourgish in everyday life – dynamic, flexible, at the heart of things
Today, Luxembourgish is an integral part of daily life– and in many different ways. Around half the population actively speak the language, andalthough the proportion is declining slightly due to immigration, the absolute number of speakers continues to grow. This shows that Luxembourgish is very much alive and evolving!
How and when the language is used depends largely on the context. Fun fact: young people use Luxembourgish as their main language on social media – creatively, spontaneously and fully in tune with the times.  It is also becoming increasingly popular among people who have been living in Luxembourg for some time now.
Although newspapers are mostly published in German, French or English, Luxembourgish is well represented on radio and television. In everyday life, you will often encounter a colourful mix of languages: sometimes people switch mid-sentence (code-switching), and sometimes the context determines whether German, English, French or Luxembourgish is spoken.
Last update23.01.2026
For more information
De Sproch vun der Woch
Multilingualism as an opportunity for our society
Multilingual literature
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/languages/languages-spoken-luxembourg.html
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Luxembourg is a resolutely multilingual environment: the majority of Luxembourgers speak four languages and the rate of foreign residents almost reaches 50% of the total population. The languages spoken vary according to the context. Within the field of administration, at least the three administrative languages – Luxembourgish, French and German – are used, while German is the dominant language in print media. At work, in the public sphere and as part of collective activities, however, it all depends on the context.
Apart from the commonly used languages in Luxembourg, other languages are also spoken, especially English, Italian and Portuguese, but also Slavic or Nordic languages, a symbol of the rather substantial expat communities of Luxembourg.
But just to reassure you:it is a rare occurrence not to find a common language in Luxembourg.
Visiting the country
Thetourist sector is very open to different languages. All the websites are multilingual and most tourist attractions have leaflets in various languages. As a large number of cross-border workers work in the hospitality and gastronomy sector, French and German are used almost universally, and English is also a very popular language.
Contacting administrations
According to the provisions of theLanguages Law of 1984,'French, German or Luxembourgish may be used' in administrative and judicial matters. This means that citizens can apply to the administration in any of these three languages, and that officials must attempt 'as far as possible' to respond in the language used by the applicant. Legislative documents are written in French and an important consequence of this on a judicial levelis that only the French language text is deemed authenticfor all levels of public administration.
At work
According to a 2018 study of the Ministry of National Education, 98% of the Luxembourg population speaks French, 80% speaks English, and 78% speaks German. Luxembourgish is used by 77% of the population.
French is the main communication language, followed by Luxembourgish, German, English and Portuguese. French is used particularly in trade, hotels, restaurants and cafes, mainly in the capital and its surrounding area.
English is thelingua francaof the large international communityworking at theEuropean institutionsand of people employed in the banking and industrial sectors. English has become the language for business and finance, and it is very frequently used at meetings among people of different nationalities.
Because the community of Portuguese immigrants is so large, they often use their mother tongue in the workplace (especially in the construction, hotel and cleaning industries) as well as during their leisure time (clubs, societies, cafes, etc.).
At school
The Luxembourg educational system places an emphasis on languages.Consequently, Luxembourg pupils learn at least three foreign languages as part of their schooling. The system also offers a wide range of measures and subjects that are aimed at integrating foreign pupils.
Media and print media
Luxembourgishis the most widely used language on Luxembourg's radio stations and TV channels. Yet otherlanguages are available: the radio station of the daily newspaperL'Essentielbroadcasts in French andARA City Radiostation in Italian, English, Portuguese, etc.
Luxembourg's written press has always been multilingual. German has always been the language of choice for the written press, although French has made up ground in traditional dailies and certain weekly newspapers. By contrast, articles inLëtzebuergeschare still the exception. Since a few years ago, there has been a number of publications in English.
Cultural life
Fancy going out tothe cinema? All the productions screened in Luxembourg are either original versions with subtitles or versions dubbed in German or French.
There are no specific rules in terms oftheatre plays: Luxembourgish, German, French, English, Portuguese, Italian – a wide range of languages and productions are available.
Shopping and shopping for groceries
A large number of employees in retail areFrench-speaking. Luxembourgish and German are also used.
At police stations
Police officers speak fluentLuxembourgish, French and German.They may also speak other languages depending on their origins.
Political life
The spoken language on the political stage isLuxembourgish, even though French is mostly used as a written language.
Collective activities
All language combinations arepossible in the context of collective activities. From local marching bands to expat clubs, you can be sure to find a suitable association. Here again, the country's three administrative languages are mostly used, but in Luxembourg, no one is excluded from collective activities based on the language they speak.
In court
Generally, people appearing in court may express themselvesin the language of their choice.An interpreter is provided for anyone who does not speak one of the Grand Duchy's three languages.
Last update25.09.2025
For more information
Multilingualism as an opportunity for our society
Multilingual literature
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/wine-and-grape-festivals.html
Top 5: Wine and grape festivals in Luxembourg for celebrating along the Moselle
Luxembourg's Moselle region is known for its rich winemaking tradition, picturesque vineyards and exquisite grape varieties. The winemakers along the Wine Route practise their craft with passion and dedication. But the region's residents are also closely entwined with the age-old traditions that have grown up around the vine. This enthusiasm is particularly evident in the many wine and grape festivals, which attract large numbers of visitors each year. Here are our top 5 festivals celebrating fine wines, local specialities and the Moselle's unique joie de vivre.
Éiner Wënzerdag: outdoor wine tasting in a picturesque village
Spring and summer are all about wine festivals! In Ehnen, visitors cansample the new vintagesin an especially charming and authentic setting.On the third weekend of July, the whole village is alive with a festive atmosphere as wine lovers fill the narrow streets. Whether from the Moselle or further afield, visitors come to immerse themselves in thetraditions and warm hospitality of the region and its people– amid winemakers' houses, wine stands and the sounds of local brass bands. But it's not just the wineries and their products that are waiting to be discovered: each year, an artist from the region is also invited to showcase their work over the festival weekend.
Galerie
Éiner Wënzerdag
© Carlo Rinnen
Éiner Wënzerdag
© Carlo Rinnen
Galerie
Picadilly
© Claude Piscitelli
Picadilly
© Claude Piscitelli
Picadilly
© Syndicat d'initiative Stadtredimus
Picadilly: a wine festival for young and old
"Don't be silly,géi op de Picadilly!" (Don't be silly, go to Picadilly) –  As its playful slogan suggests, the wine and winegrowers' festival heldin Stadtbredimus on the second weekend of August each yearis a little unconventional. Instead of traditional wine tastings and the laid-back Moselle charm, this festival is simply one big party. A wine garden featuring Luxembourgish wines and Crémants, live concerts and an international food village attract large numbers of visitors, including many from beyond the Grand Duchy's borders. One of the undisputed highlights of the festival is thePicadilly wine: a sparkling, sweet and refreshing drink made with wine and blackcurrant, available exclusively at that event.
Drauwen-a Wäifest Gréiwemaacher: wine, tradition and crowning moments
The grape and wine festival in Grevenmacher is one of thetrue highlights of the season. Every year on thesecond weekend of September, the Moselle metroplis is devoted entirely to the vine. At Luxembourg's biggest wine festival, visitors can look forward to fine local vintages and a packed programme of events, including a parade, live concerts, fireworks and – as a real highlight and the official start of the celebrations – thecrowning of the Luxembourg Wine Queen. As one of the oldest winemakers' festivals in the Grand Duchy, the “Maacher Wäifest” will celebrate its 75th anniversary in 2025 – with a special programme to mark the occasion.
Galerie
Maacher Wäifest
© Fotoclub Flash, Rinnen
Maacher Wäifest
© Photo-Club Flash Grevenmacher
Maacher Wäifest
© Jeannot Scheid
Galerie
Riesling Open
© Carlo Rinnen
Riesling Open
© Carlo Rinnen
Riesling Open
© Carlo Rinnen
Riesling Open
© Carlo Rinnen
Riesling Open: a weekend dedicated to Riesling
Riesling is one of the most important grape varieties in the Luxembourg Moselle region. It delights wine lovers from home and abroad with its expressive minerality and subtle fruity notes. On thethird weekend of September, this classic grape variety is celebrated with a three-day festivalin the villages of the Riesling commune of Wormeldange. Visitors can explore numerous open wineries and meet local winemakers amid the picturesque vineyards, where the steep slopes and limestone soils give Riesling its unmistakable character. Tastings and the chance to buy wines straight from the cellar are all part of the experience. Not to be missed either: thecrowning of the Riesling Queen, which marks the start of this festive wine-filled weekend.
Hunnefeier: marking the end of the grape harvest
Held on thethird weekend of October in Schengen, the "Hunnefeier" is more than just a wine festival. It marks the end of the grape harvest and has its roots in an old tradition that saw the fastest harvester awarded a live cockerel as a prize. Today, the traditional cockerel – the "Schengener Hinnchen"– lives on as ahandcrafted clay collector's item. In keeping with the theme, visitors can also look forward to a flea and craft market, a vintage tractor meet-up and a varied entertainment programme. Of course, wine is never far away either! Alongside local favourites, glasses are also filled with "Fiederwäissen", a young, still-fermenting wine traditionally enjoyed at this time of year.
Galerie
Hunnefeier
© Commune de Schengen
Hunnefeier
© MAINT
Hunnefeier
© Commune de Schengen
Hunnefeier
© MAINT
Wine and grape festivals at a glance
Last update16.01.2026
For more information
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Wine tourism in Luxembourg: a feast for the senses
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/festival-international-bd-contern.html
International Comics Festival in Contern
It is the highlight of the summer for comic-book lovers: the International Comics Festival in Contern. In July, the town of Contern is transformed into one big comic village, and the event offers something for everyone. Dealer stands are set up  throughout the village, and authors and illustrators themselves are on hand to sign copies of their work.
Comics as far as the eye can see
Do you think comics are only for kids? Think again! Today, comics are an integral part of our culture and they tell stories that appeal to adults and young people alike. This is why,every year in July, the town of Contern hosts a festival celebrating comics in all their various forms.
The focus of the festival each and every year is the artists themselves. Whether familiar faces or up-and-coming talent:Dozens of authors and illustrators travel from Luxembourg and abroadspecifically for this eventto meet their fans and sign copies of their work. Some artists are already very well known, for example through their work for Marvel, The Three ??? or the Smurfs, while others are meeting their readers for the first time and presenting entirely new comics. The festival is the perfect place for spontaneous conversation and also provides plenty of opportunities for a selfie here and there. It's definitely worth taking alook at the festival programme!
Thestalls also attract many visitorslooking for a rare comic for their own collection or just wanting to browse through the numerous comics for sale at the festival. Every year, dealers from Luxembourg and the Greater Region come to Contern bringing new and used classics, collectibles, and novelties as well as action figures, posters, DVDs, and everything else that comic enthusiasts are looking for.
What? Where? When?
The Comic Book Festival will take place on19 and 20 July 2025 in Contern, from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m on both Saturday and Sunday. Adult admission is €5 and children under 12 are free.
There will besigning sessions on both days that will take place until 6 p.m.
How to get there: Contern is located about 10 km southeast of Luxembourg City. During the festival, parking spaces outside the town are signposted and shuttle buses are available from the parking spaces to the town.
A programme for all the senses
To say that the festival is popular is an understatement: since 1994 it has been an integral part of the summer event calendar here in Luxembourg. In the beginning it was confined to the local sports hall, but over the years it has grown and now fills the streets of the entire town. This growth is primarily due to how the festival targets a very broad audience.
It is an unforgettable family experience, which – in addition to the stands and signing sessions – also includes aspecial programme for children, complete with a scavenger hunt and workshops in theKids' Corner. The festival programme also includesentertaining concerts, during which brass bands and other artists take the stage. If you happen to be there at the right time, you might also meet some cosplayers and get the chance to take a few photos.
Comic Craftsmanship in Contern
Comics are regarded as a form of art in Francophone cultures and they are extremely popular in Luxembourg, which is also due to the numerous languages spoken in the country. French-language classics such as Asterix andLucky Lukeare just as well known and popular as Japanese mangas and superhero comics from the U.S.
Luxembourg has also developed its own artistic scene – one which can hold its own on the international stage. Paving the way for this artistic movement in Luxembourg was the artistic duo Roger Leiner and Lucien Czuga, who breathed life into the incomparableSuperjhemp– not to be confused with a well-known superhero from the U.S. Today, comics in Luxembourg feature a lively variety of styles: from the manga artist Sabrina Kaufmann to the illustrators Sandra Martins and Andy Genen and authors such as Marc Angel and Lucien Czuga, who all have international fan bases.
Interview with Nora Moretti, patron of the 31st edition of the festival
What motivated you to participate in a comic book festival in Luxembourg?
I have already participated in several editions of the Contern festival, which always went very well. It was therefore a real pleasure and an honour to be named patron of the 2025 edition.
You have been chosen to design the poster for this edition. What was your inspiration?
I worked on the poster concept together with the organizer Églantine, choosing to highlight roses, the symbolic flower of Luxembourg, as well as a typical view of the historic centre of the capital. In addition, we find the festival's mascot character, Bédéric, in the company of Princess Sara [a character created by Nora Moretti, editor's note]. I loved drawing them together, because a crossover with characters from different universes is always nice.
What is your impression of Luxembourg when you visit?
Having participated in several editions of the Contern festival, yes, I had already visited Luxembourg a little, and each time it was really pleasant: the authors are spoiled there, the team of volunteers is fantastic, the place is magnificent and the public adorable... in short, fantastic!
What future personal project(s) can you tell us about?
I'm going to start volume 4 of the "Fairy Garden" series soon, still with my partner and writer Audrey Alwett; we're also talking about some one-shots of Princess Sara. At the same time, I am preparing other projects to be carried out later, but which are not yet fully defined.
The poster for the 31st edition of the festival is designed by Nora Moretti. Born in Venice, Nora is an Italian illustrator and designer known for her elegant and expressive style. She works on various projects ranging from comics to animation, interactive games and book covers. His collaboration with writer Audrey Alwett has given birth to the successful series Princess Sara, a loose adaptation of the novel The Little Princess. Nora teaches at the Venezia Comix comics school, sharing her passion and expertise with new generations. And if you want to meet her, she will be at the festival to sign her works!
Last update18.07.2025
For more information
News
Top5: Medieval festivals in Luxembourg
Top 5: Wine and grape festivals in Luxembourg for celebrating along the Moselle
Schueberfouer – three weeks of funfair in summer
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/traditions-fete-medievale-moyen-age.html
Top 5: Medieval festivals
The Middle Ages was a key period for Luxembourg's historical identity. The many majestic castles dotted across the country and the fortress that dominates Luxembourg City with its ramparts, turrets and casemates all bear witness to this eventful historical time. And the medieval period continues to be a source of inspiration for markets and festivals. We have selected a series of great events where the spirit of the legendary Knights of the Round Table lives on, to give you a taste of what life was like in medieval times.
Butschebuerger Buergfest
Rushes strewn on the ground, knights, entertainers, market vendors and traditional artisans – the spirit of the Middle Ages is alive and well at theButschebuerger Buergfest. What is impressive about this festival is that every year,the entire Boudersberg district is turned into a medieval village, attracting thousands of visitors on the lookout for an exciting encounter with history.
According to the organisers, withmore than 90 market vendors and artisans, it is the largest medieval festival in the Greater Region. The range of handicraft products includes period jewellery and clothes, ornaments, decorations, and stone-carved weapons and sculptures, all showcasing traditional techniques.
And those looking for a more action-packed medieval experience will also not be disappointed, with archery, jousting, acrobatics, a medieval camp, troubadours and sword-fighting – something for people of all ages.
Dudelange Medieval Christmas Market
The medievalChristmas marketin Dudelange is already a firm tradition. It usually takes place on Place de l'Hôtel de Ville, with merchants in medieval costume selling gifts, food and drink from their typical wooden huts. But there are also taverns, campfires and storytellers, creating a magical medieval atmosphere that will transport visitors back in time.
Useldange medieval festival
For medieval festival-goers, a trip to the little village of Useldange is a must. The village centre is dominated by the12th-century castle with its two towersand monumental keep. The castle has a turbulent history: over the years it was inherited, sold, recaptured, confiscated and damaged, before being razed to the ground in 1903. The castle ruins were purchased in 1924 with the aim of progressively restoring and rebuilding the edifice.
Nowadays,this former stronghold hosts amajor medieval festivalevery year, the perfect opportunity to travel back in time over the course of a weekend. The festival is one of the most authentic in the Greater Region, inspired by the unique atmosphere created by the majestic castle. It was originally held next to the village hall, in the "Millenhaff", the grounds of the old mill, under the castle. But when the site was renovated in 2010,the castle courtyard and moat were incorporated into the festival, adding to the medieval backdrop and atmosphere.
Nearly60 market vendors, 11 knights' camps, 10 artisans and 9 music groupsgather among the cobbled streets, moats and walls, playing host to some 10,000 visitors and giving them the opportunity to see skilled bakers, potters, weavers, saddlers and blacksmiths at work. Jousting, juggling, magic tricks and fortune telling all add to the medieval entertainment. The festival is held every year in mid-June.
Calendar of medieval festivals
Vianden medieval festival
Perched on a promontory overlooking the peaceful village below,Vianden Castleis an outstanding heritage site. The vast, imposing edifice, an important medieval stronghold, is remarkably well preserved. Its collections of period objects and restored rooms transport visitors back in time to Luxembourg's medieval past.
The residence of the powerful Counts of Vianden, built between the 11th and 14th centuries, today plays host toan impressive medieval festivalalso known as the Knights' Festival.For nine days, princesses and dragons take over the castle, transporting it back to the Middle Ages.
Knights' camps, fire shows, epic combats, jugglers, minstrels and falcon demonstrations offer visitors a glimpse of another era. The festival is brought to life with music, street entertainers and a medieval market, all of which help to create an authentic atmosphere.
"Tempus Mediaevale" festival in Koerich
Just before the arrival of autumn, the magnificent ruins of theChâteau de Koerich, built in 1338, bid farewell to summer in a blaze of medieval glory. Skilled craftspeople, entertainers and knights all gather for the famousTempus Mediaevale, held every year in September in theGréiweschlass.
In a unique medieval atmosphere, visitors can learn aboutancient methods of cooking over fire, admireskilled artisans using medieval toolsand see what daily life was like in the Middle Ages. For two days, potters, blacksmiths, calligraphers, basket-makers and bow-makers demonstrate their know-how, while entertainers, wizards and magicians put on a captivating show for visitors of all ages.
Even thewares on sale are inspired by this bygone era: jams, local honey, jewellery, wooden toys, leather objects, medieval accessories, knives, artisanal liqueurs, ceramics, traditional clothes and decorative iron creations are all available for visitors to buy. While children will love the chance to ride a donkey, adults can try their hand at axe-throwing.
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
Les traditions de Pâques au Luxembourg: la chasse aux oeufs, Éimaischen et les autres coutumes
Kermesse et Hämmelsmarsch: Faire la fête selon la tradition et en musique
Célébrez la Fête nationale : Rejoignez les festivités à l’occasion de l’anniversaire du Grand-Duc au Luxembourg!
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/funfair-haemmelsmarsch.html
Fairs and the Hämmelsmarsch: Traditional celebrations against a musical backdrop
Luxembourg's colourful fairs and the uniqueHämmelsmarsch(mutton march) that accompanies them never fail to draw a crowd.  These celebrations – whether in quaint villages or at the famousSchueberfouerfunfair in Luxembourg City – bring the people of Luxembourg together year after year.  Rides, games, parades and culinary delights meld into a festive mosaic that captivates young and old alike.  Join us as we delve deeper into the world of fairs in the Grand Duchy.
The magic of fairs: community and tradition
Whether in a city or a village, fairs and festivals can be found everywhere in Luxembourg. They areplaces of entertainment, featuring colourful illuminations, games of skill and a range of rides. And the food on offer is just as varied:Gromperekichelcher(Luxembourg's popular potato fritters), grilled food, chips and sweet treats.The stalls not only sell delicious snacks but also create a warm and welcoming atmosphere. In this way, Luxembourg's fairs transform otherwise blank public spaces into bustling hubs where people can socialise and have fun. They are anintegral part of Luxembourgish culture, andevery year, performers and visitors reuniteto honour this longstanding tradition.
Funfairs in Luxembourg
Game booths
There are lots of things to win at the game booths, for example giant plush toys.
© Laurent Schwaller
Gromperekichelcher
No fair is complete without Gromperekichelcher. The deep-fried potato fritters have a long tradition in Luxembourg.
© SIP
Social meeting place
In towns, as well as in villages, funfairs are a social meeting place.
© SIP
Sweets
The fairs offer a wide variety of sweets.
© Laurent Schwaller
Hämmelsmarsch
The music procession plays the Hämmelsmarsch for the opening of the Schueberfouer.
© Laurent Schwaller
Hämmelsmarsch
The sheep are still part of the opening ceremony of the Schueberfouer. The shepherds wear blue farmers' blouses during the procession.
© Laurent Schwaller
However, today's fairs bear little resemblance to their historical predecessors.Originally, they were religious festivals dedicated to the patron saint of a church or the anniversary of a church consecration. And they were often linked to markets, which are rarely found these days.  But although they have evolved over the years, a musical parade –theHämmelsmarsch–still heralds the start of a fair.
And the essence of fairs as venues for community gathering and socialising hasn't changed, either.  They continue to serve aslocal meeting points where people of all generations – whether locals or visitors, family or friends– can come together for food and fun.
TheHämmelsmarsch: a musical invitation to the fair
TheHämmelsmarschis a time-honoured Luxembourgish tradition that seesthe local music associations parading through the streets to invite everyone to the upcoming fair. The musicians play the eponymous song "Hämmelsmarsch" byMichel Lentz.In the past, a shepherd would lead the parade with his finest sheep, followed by the musicians. Today, this tradition is only preserved at theSchueberfouer, the city of Luxembourg's own fair. In other towns and villages, the sheep are sadly no longer part of the festivities.
But theHämmelsmarschis not just a well-known tune heralding the start of a local fair – it is also animportant source of income for localmusic associations: As they parade through the various villages, the musiciansenthusiastically collect donations. If a contribution is particularly generous, they are more than happy to perform the waltz "T'ass Kiermes am Duerf" (There's a fair in thevillage) or offer a celebratory fanfare before moving on.
The Walfer Musek parades through the village and plays the Hämmelsmarsch. (Video/Audio)
© Walfer Musek
The origins of the parade are rooted in theSchueberfouer, which was partly a market. In the past,shooting competitions were held to celebrate theSchueberfouer, with the prize being a sheep,also called "hammel" in Luxembourgish. With theHämmelsmarsch, the shepherds wanted to showcase their magnificent animals to promote both the competition and their own business. The parade turned out to be a huge success, so much so that theHämmelsmarschtook place even when there were no sheep to be won.Since 2008, theSchueberfouerwith itsHämmelsmarschhas belonged to the national inventory of intangible cultural heritage.
Extract from Klibberkleeschen 1986 illustrating the Hämmelsmarsch. (Video/Audio)
© Archives: CNA, Luxembourg
Michel Lentz: spotlight on Luxembourg's national poet
Michel Lentzwas a prominentLuxembourgish author and national poet of the 19th century. Born the son of a baker, he went on to became a civil servant and gainednationwide famefor his side passion of writing. His patriotism is evident inwell-known works such as "De Feierwon" and "Ons Heemecht".
"De Feierwon" includes adeclaration of Luxembourg's independence: "Mir wëlle bleiwe wat mir sin" (We want to remain what we are). This phrase is known to almost every Luxembourger and has become thecountry's guiding principle.
The first and fourth stanzas of the poem "Ons Heemecht" (Our homeland), set to a melody byAntoineZinnen,were long considered the unofficial national anthem of Luxembourg, before gaining official status in 1993.
From mysterious origins to cultural anthem
Although the melody of theHämmelsmarschis widely known, its creator remains a mystery.  The piece is actuallya folk tune passed down through generations, but its origins are still unclear. The traditional melody was turnedinto a song in the 19th  centurywhenMichel Lentzwrote lyrics for it and named it "Hämmelsmarsch". The song hasalso been frequently released under the title "Schuebermëss".In the four-stanza poem, he mentions how people come "vu wäit an no" (from far and near) for theSchueberfouer.The main theme of the piece is collective joy and social happiness, harmoniously intertwined with celebration and tradition. The only catch? Nothing at the fair is free!
Last update22.07.2024
For more information
Schueberfouer – three weeks of funfair in summer
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Luxembourg’s music associations – where the community is in time.
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/intangible-cultural-heritage-luxembourg.html
The intangible cultural heritage in the spotlight: discover seven traditional treasures of Luxembourg
In the heart of Europe, Luxembourg boasts a rich heritage of intangible culture. From the impressive art of dry stone walling, the timeless importance of midwives in society and traditional folk dances to the well-established agricultural technique ofFléizen– these cultural treasures all tell a story that has lasted for generations. A closer look at these living traditions opens up a fascinating panorama of Luxembourg's cultural diversity.
Stone by stone: the art of dry stone walling
Dry stone walling is a sustainable construction method which relies onthe weight of the stones and a skillful arrangementto create a stable structure.These walls are built without any binding agents such as mortar.
Dry stone structures can be found in numerous locations in Luxembourg, in step with the features of the local landscape. Notable examples includevineyard wallsalong the Moselle river,hiking trailsin the Mullerthal Region,retaining wallsin the Luxembourg Ardennes anddrainage and irrigation systemsin the valleys. The knowledge needed to build these structures has been handed down by word of mouth over the centuries.
In the past, stones were excavated by tillage operations, then sorted and stacked so that they could be reused. Some dry stone walling techniques were perfected in this way, over the centuries. However,this construction method fell into disuse at one pointdue to the rise of modern technology and new building materials.
In 2024, following an international application by 13 European countries,the art of dry stone walling was added to the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage list, as one of a number of border spanning traditions.
The time-tested art of midwifery
A midwife is a healthcare provider who is trained in medicine and anatomy. The art of the profession is toprovide comprehensive support for parents before, during and after pregnancy.Midwivesrely primarily on their natural senses, and these skills were traditionally handed down by word of mouth.
Thefirst state midwifery school was founded in Luxembourgback in 1877, followed by thecreation of the Luxembourg Midwives Association (ALSF)in 1919. This association brings together midwives from Luxembourg with various cultural backgrounds.
The care provided by a midwife includes regularcheck-ups, care for mothers and antenatal classes. Midwives also help mothers tobetter understand their own body. This is crucial to ensure confident mothers and healthy children.
The art of midwifery is appreciated equally by the state, doctors and society.In 2023, the art of midwifery was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List.
Fléizen: a well-established agricultural technique in Luxembourg
Fléizenis an agricultural techniquethat has been used ​ by Luxembourgish farmers since the 15th century.It involves using ditches to irrigate meadowsby diverting water from streams, rivers or artificial ponds. This takes place three times a year: at the end of winter, after the harvest season and in autumn.
The result: increased hay production, greater biodiversity and improved flood protection mechanisms.Although modern technologies have replaced this cultural practice, the Luxembourg landscape, especially the Ösling, remains marked by these trenches.
In the 19th century,Fléizenhelped to cover the production of cattle feed, andthe technique was even legally standardised. From the 1940s, however,the ditches became an obstacle to increasingly heavy agricultural machinery, while artificial fertiliser proved to be much more efficient.
Nowadays, the trenches andFléizenare a cultural asset, and have been part of the national inventory of intangible cultural heritage since 2021.In 2023,Fléizenofficially became part of the UNESCO World Heritage.
Sheep as conservationists: Luxembourg'sWanderschéiferei
In Luxembourg, the termWanderschéiferei(sheep transhumance) refers to therotational grazing of herds of sheep. This practice takes place in the rural north as well as in the urban south.
The sheep are led from one meadow to the next, coordinated by a shepherd and his dog.The reason: toprepare land for farming, but also to disseminate and preserve biodiversity. Sheep grazing usually begins in mid-April and lasts until autumn or winter, depending on the food supply.
Although grazing plans are drawn up, the sheep and nature ultimately determine the pace. What's more,the sheep transport insects and seeds from meadow to meadow, which supports natural diversity.Wanderschéifereithus counteracts the isolation effects of our divided landscape.
Oncethis part ofthe conservation workis done, the sheep start grazing onconventionally farmed landto prepare it for the winter.TheWanderschéifereihas the UNESCO World Heritage status since 2023.
Luxembourg's intangible cultural heritage
Customs and traditions are part of the intangible cultural heritage that people in this country experience on a daily basis.That's why it is also called living heritagebecause it is passed on from generation to generation and isconstantly recreated through constant influences.
The Luxembourg Ministry of Culture records the country's intangible cultural heritage in aninventory. That way,our cultural diversity and identity is not only preservedbut it can also be experienced first-handatlarger eventsand festivals.
UNESCO World Cultural Heritage
Two of our national cultural treasures have been recognised as Intangible World Cultural Heritage by UNESCO:
Traditions through dance: the diversity of Luxembourgish folk dances
Once almost forgotten, Luxembourgish folk dances are now very much alive and firmly anchored in the country's culture. There are around30 different traditional dances that are danced in pairs, including theChiberli,Pik PolkaorSchottesch Näip.
These dances areperformed by national dance groups at folk festivals or events that represent the country. The dancers weartraditional clothesand are accompanied bylive folk songs. The aim is to showcase the traditions in a lively way and to preserve and pass on the cultural heritage
In the 1930s, a youth hostel movement recognised the disappearance of these traditions and subsequently laid the foundation for their preservation throughextensive research and questioning of contemporary witnesses.The first folklore clubs were founded after the Second World War, and they are still dedicated to keeping these customs alive today.
The Feast of Saint Barbara
The Feast of Saint Barbara, the patron saint of miners, is celebratedannually on 4 December,especially in the south of the country.Thecelebrations typically include a procession through the village, firecrackers and a feast.
What's more, 4 December also serves as aday of remembrance for the 1,500 minerswho lost their lives in the Minett iron ore mines. The miners' demanding and extremely dangerouswork laid the foundation for Luxembourg's current wealth.
This custom has existed since at least 1890 and even became apaid holiday for miners in the 1920s and 30s. Although Luxembourg's last mine, Thillenberg mine,was closed over 40 years ago, the tradition lives on today. Even if the pandemic put a stop to the annual festivities,the celebrations throughout the south have now regained their former glory.
Luxembourg's house and field names: a window into the country's history
Luxembourg's house and field names provide a living cultural heritagefeaturing historical language that pre-dates our earliest written records. The names given to squares and buildings serve as anorientation system in public places. This practice of name-giving has been passed down from generation to generation mainly by word of mouth and is accessible to all. It not only helps us to understand places,but it also conveys information about their identity and boosts social cohesion.
For example, inBech-Kleinmacher there is a building called "A Possen", which houses a museum and a wine tavern.Many field names have historical rootswhich date back to Roman times, such as"Um Kiem", a Roman road on the Kirchberg plateau. Other names have a more sinister nature, such as the"Galgenbierger"execution sites. They all share the ability to provide aninsight into the history of the countryand its society.
To this day, house and field names are taken into account when naming new infrastructure, such as streets, districts or transport stops/stations.Their analysis can evenidentifypotential archaeological sites and biotopes.
Last update12.12.2024
For more information
Hopping procession
UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE IN LUXEMBOURG
THE HAUPESCHBLÉISER – THE UNESCO-RECOGNISED HUNTING HORN PLAYERS OF LUXEMBOURG
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/world-heritage-haupeschbleiser-unesco.html
The Haupeschbléiser: The UNESCO-recognised hunting horn players of Luxembourg
TheHaupeschbléiserwere inscribed into UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage List three years ago. They have been filling the air with the sounds of their hunting horns since the 1970s and, as a national association, are playing a pivotal role in preserving a three-centuries-old tradition. But what is the story behind this musical art form in Luxembourg that dates back to the French royal court?
Community, nature and culture: Luxembourg's Haupeschbléiser
TheHaupeschbléiser(St. Hubert Hunting Horn Players of Luxembourg) areLuxembourgish musicians dedicated to preserving a centuries-old tradition: playing the French hunting horn. The instrumentwas originally used as a communication tool by hunters. That's because its sound carries far and can reach up to 100 dB – comparable to the volume of an electrically amplified concert.For theHaupeschbléiser, however, the main focus is on the music itself and on making music together with the other horn players, while hunting takes a back seat.
Dressed intraditional riding coatsin the colours of Luxembourg's royal house – navy blue and orange – they perform classical fanfare and compose new pieces that pay homage to Luxembourg.Conviviality and being at one with nature are central to their ethos. Founded byGuyWagner with fellow musicians in 1973, after he had bought his first hunting horn a year earlier, theHaupeschbléiserhave nurtured this art form over the decades.In 2020, they were recognised as an intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO, along with France, Belgium and Italy. This year, they loudly celebrated their 50th anniversary at the Mersch church in front of over 500 spectators and thus the ongoing preservation of an age-old tradition.
Brilliant breathing technique of the hunting horn players
The hunting horn was developed300 years ago in France, during the reign of Louis XIV and Louis XV, and was originally intended as acommunication tool for hunters.  Later improvements expanded the musical capabilities of the hunting horn,meaning it could also be used to play musical pieces for entertainment.  Just like their traditional attire, the horn played by theHaupeschbléisertoday has remained true to its roots.  This triple-coiled instrument measures an impressive 4.5 meters when fully extended and hasneither buttons nor valves.  Because of this, the 18 members of theHaupeschbléiserrely purely onbreathing technique and physical effortto play it.  Given this complexity, singing plays an important role for theHaupeschbléiser. It is used during practice to help memorise songs, and it also facilitates social bonding within the group, since not all members can read music.
Interview with the founder and president of theHaupeschbléiser:GuyWagner
How has the entry on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List affected theHaupeschbléiser?
Being inscribed as an intangible cultural heritage has brought us an entirely new level of recognition in Luxembourg.Our cultural presence has increased, and both UNESCO and the Ministry of Culture have asked us to perform concerts. I think people are happy that this art and tradition are being preserved.
What types of events do theHaupeschbléiserperformat?
We regularly play atmasses, such as the St Hubertus masses in the Berdorf caves. We've heldconcertsall over the country and even had the honour of performing for Grand DukeJeanin 2009. We have a performance coming up atNeumünster Abbey, and we're also planning a concert at the cathedral next year. We also get a lot of bookings forevents like weddings and other celebrations.
Two UNESCO intangible cultural heritage listings
TheHaupeschbléiserwere honoured to become Luxembourg'ssecond intangible cultural heritageon the UNESCO list, after theEchternach Hopping Processionhad already been inscribed in 2010.
Are there any criteria for joining theHaupeschbléiser?
The main things we look for areenthusiasm and an interest in learning the natural horn. Reading sheet music is optional. Of course, you also have to enjoy making music, and it can help to have a musical ear as well. But it's important to bear in mind thatlearning takes time.
Do theHaupeschbléiserhave their own music school?
Yes, we have our own school. Lessons are heldtwice a month in the evenings, from 7 to 9 p.m., at the church in Kopstal. Hunting horns can be provided on request. In the summer, we often rehearse outdoors, and we usually spend some more time together after the lesson. So there's a real spirit of community here, too. That's exactly how it should be.
Les Jardins en musique (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update13.08.2024
For more information
Echternach Hopping Procession
EUROPEAN HERITAGE DAYS 2023
UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE IN LUXEMBOURG
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/carillon-cathedral-notre-dame-luxembourg.html
The carillon plays for everyone
At the top of the tower of Notre-Dame Cathedral is a fabulous carillon with 37 bells. This musical instrument, which dominates the Luxembourg capital, rings throughout the year. Its repertoire includes some fifty pieces of typical Luxembourg music.
Road traffic, horns, sirens, deafening construction noise: in the midst of this constant barrage of sound, the sweet melodies of the carillon in Notre-Dame Cathedral float through the avenues and winding streets of Luxembourg City.The 37 bells that make up this extraordinary musical instrumentchime every day, from 7am to 10pm, bringing a touch of magic to the streets with their gentle music. To see the carillon, you will need to climb the steps of the cathedral until you reach its highest tower. And there, some 33 metres up, you will find the special musical instrument that creates these unique sounds.
How does the carillon work?
'The carillon can play around 50 melodies,' explains Paul Breisch, the cathedral organist, who also records the carillon melodies. 'Ten years ago, I spent several months producing arrangements – a tricky task because not all piano melodies can be applied to a carillon. Unlike a piano, a bell produces a sound that rings on, while the sound made by a piano disappears as soon as you release the key,' he explains.
A few decades ago, the carillon was operated by an organ with a punched card. 'Now you sit down at a sort of piano made of bells, which is operated by a small electronic keyboard. Each key is linked to a clapper inside a bell, which swings into action when the key is pressed.'
The largest of the 37 bells that make up the carillon weighs 400 kilosand has a diameter of 90 centimetres. It is the only one to bear an inscription (Incipit hora speranti preziosa - for those who hope, a precious hour begins (Abbot Emmanuel Reichling)). The smallest bell weighs 11 kilos and has a diameter of 20.5 cm.
The history of the carillon
The sound of church bells is part of the city soundscape and provides a unique musical accompaniment. A Dutch company comes to perform regular maintenance once a year to make sure this special instrument can continue bringing music to our ears for a long time to come. 'Sometimes a few hammers or a spring need to be changed. The carillon is like a car,' explains Paul Breisch.
The cathedral's carillon is no longer in its prime.In 1635, the Jesuits installed a carillon in the west tower.The east tower was not completed until 1935-38, and it was during this period that the cathedral was enlarged to 37 bells by the Ungerer bell foundry in Strasbourg. After the fire in the tower in 1985, the carillon was recast in Holland by the Petit&Fritsen bell foundry.
But the cathedral's carillon isn't the only one to set the rhythm of passers-by's days. There's still one in Echternach, another in the small tower of the Pescatore Foundation and several smaller ones scattered around the country.
Melodies resounding through the capital
'Before I began operating the carillon, typical Luxembourgish melodies were played one after the other,' remembers Paul Breisch. Nowadays, the repertoire is very varied.Some 60 arrangements of around 50 different melodies are recorded in the instrument's system.These include classicslike 'De Feierwon', 'Ech sinn e Groussen Hexenmechter', 'Ech drénken gier mäin Pättchen', 'Un der Atert', 'Kättche, Kättche" and 'Et wor ee Meedche vu Gëtzen".
The melodies are played every hour on the hourand vary depending on the season. In winter, the music brings some warmth to passers-by on pavements and accompanies those working at the Christmas markets throughout the day with typical festive melodies. The tones of 'Léiwe Kleeschen', 'Kanner loost mer lëschteg sinn', 'Venez divin Messie', 'Il est né le divin enfant', 'Ave Maria' and many other well-known Christmas melodies are also part of the repertoire.
But the bells also ring for other occasions during the year, for example for the hopping procession or Pentecost, with 'T'si vill schéi Rousen an der Stad', 'D'Maargréitchen' and 'T'ass Kiermes am Duerf'. To mark the national day festivities, the carillon livens up the capital with the melodies 'Wilhelmus' and 'Léif Mamm', and even the national anthem 'Ons Heemecht'.
History of the cathedral
Nestling in the heart of the city centre, Notre-Dame Cathedral is a Norman jewel of medieval architecture. Originally a Jesuit church,the foundation stone was laid in 1613. The nave dates from the 17th century, and the transept and choir with crypt were added in 1935. Since 1794, it has housed the miraculous statue of the Consolatrice des Affligés, patron saint of the country and the city of Luxembourg. In 1879, Pope Pius IX elevated it to the rank of cathedral.
On 5 April 1985, the cathedral's bell tower caught fire during renovation work. The reconstruction was completed in October 1985.
Last update19.09.2025
For more information
Geenzefest: Wiltz's colorful broom festival
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
Léiffrawëschdag: a unique harvest festival in Greiveldange
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/new-year-celebrations.html
New Year's Celebrations: join us!
On 31 December, as the year's last hours count down, Luxembourgers like to get together with their family and friends to celebrate. Coming together in public is a popular way to greet the new year, but many like to enjoy a festive evening with close friends or family at home for a New Year's Eve dinner. On 1 January, which is a bank holiday, it is customary to have a long sleep-in and then visit relatives to wish themAlles Guddes am neie Joer! And sometimes a wig made of goat's hair …
New Year's Eve celebrations
Do you prefer anight out in a club, a classy ballor an intimate gathering at home for those last hours of the year? The country has much to offer, and from thewell-known hotspots which host New Year's parties, to the end-of-year balls, we are certain that you will find a crowd with which to party into the new year.
However,most Luxembourgers still enjoy celebrating at home, either in the family circle, or with some very good friends. If you arebeing invited for such an occasion, it is undoubtedly an honour. Luxembourgers will have taken great care to prepare the evening, and invitations may be made as early as autumn.
Guests will usually arrive in the early evening hours, at which time an aperitif and somehors d'oeuvrewill be served, followed by a meal which can range from a fondue or similar communal dish to an opulent three-course masterpiece meal. Afterwards it is time to review the past year and talk about plans for the next. Until the clock nearly strikes midnight, at which time the hosts are going to take the bottle of bubbly wine,crémantor champagne, out of the fridge that they have put aside for this special occasion.
Sproch vun der Woch
Vill Gléck am Neie Joer
Happy New Year!
More expressions in Luxembourgish
Alles Guddes am neie Joer
At midnight, people toast each other, including the children who will, of course, have been served a non-alcoholic alternative,and wish each otherVill Gléck am neie Joer(Much luck in the new year) orAlles Guddes am neie Joer(All the best in the New Year). This is actually part of a saying whose complete version is:
Alles Guddes am neie Joer(All the best in the New Year)
An eng Paréck mat Geessenhoer(And a wig with goat's hair)
A siwe Lais op engem Joer.(And seven lice on one hair.)
Its origins are lost in time, but should you know the complete verse, you'll be sure to impress your friends.
How to start the New Year?
1 January is usually started with a long sleep-in to rest from the previous night's activities, followed by the customary family visits. Luxembourgers will go to aunts, uncles and the extended family to wish each other a good start into the new year. As it is a bank holiday, many also enjoy the day at home, relaxing after the holidays and the celebrations the night before.
In many parts of the world, it has also become custom to adopt some New Year's resolution(s), and Luxembourg is no exception to that rule. Although there is very little information about how long these resolutions are being observed for.
Last update07.11.2024
For more information
7 things you need to know when you're invited for dinner in Luxembourg
Crémant
Dräikinneksdag: celebrating Epiphany with a cake
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/europe-day.html
Europe Day: let's celebrate the European Union together!
On 9 May, the European Union (EU) celebrates Europe Day to commemorate the Schuman declaration. This declaration, held in 1950 by the then French Foreign Minister, is now considered the founding act of the EU. In Luxembourg, Europe Day was declared a legal public holiday in 2019, making the Grand Duchy the only country to have made this choice for now.
Why is Europe Day a bank holiday in Luxembourg?
Luxembourg has been one of the EU's most fervent advocatessince the inception of the European project. In fact, support for the EU remains high in the Grand Duchy. This support is, in part, due to the open and multicultural nature of Luxembourg society, as well as the fact that Luxembourg has always been a landlocked country between two of Europe's superpowers - Germany and France.Thus, Luxembourg actively welcomes the EU's pledge to preserve peace on the continent and ensure prosperity for all.
Consequently, the Grand Duchy has played a key role in the construction of Europe at every stage, from the adoption of the treaty establishing the European Coal and Steel Community in Luxembourg in 1952, to the signing of theSchengen agreementsin 1985, as well as other treaties.Luxembourgers have understood that a peaceful Europe, the main goal of the Schuman declaration,is beneficial to all.Moreover, asLuxembourg City is one of the three European Capitals,and home to important institutions and administrations, it is clear that the country, despite its relatively small size, isfully committed to the European project.
The residents of the Grand Duchy embody the true spirit of Europe, as they cross the borders of their German, Belgian or French neighbours with as much ease as they speak one of the many languages used on a daily basis in Luxembourg.The country's openness and multicultural mindset thus represent some of the fundamental values of the European Union.
Did you know?
Robert Schuman was born on 29 June 1886 in Luxembourg city!
His father was a German customs officer from Lorraine and his mother was Luxembourgish. He was thereforeGerman by birth, but the mother tongue of the future French minister was Luxembourgish.
His birthplace is located in the suburb of Clausen. Since 2019, this building has been used by theLuxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (C2DH).
The Schuman Declaration – a revolution
In 1950, then French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman put forward a revolutionary idea: to unite French and German coal and steel productions in one institution, in order tosafeguard peace on the continent and share economic prosperity.The aim of the declaration was to establish an institution that would not only manage two economic resources, but which would create a common market and set the foundation for a new political entity. Thus,the Schuman Declaration is considered by many as the founding act of the European Union,an event that has been honoured since 1985 with the Europe Day.
Two years after the Schuman Declaration, the European Coal and Steel Community was created, followed by the signing of the Treaty of Rome in 1957. Luxembourg was actively involved in all these decisive steps, as well as in all the subsequent treaties and agreements that helped to deepen European cooperation.
Last update26.05.2025
For more information
Robert Schuman and the beginnings of the European Union
Luxembourg, home of European institutions
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/epiphany.html
Dräikinneksdag: celebrating Epiphany with a cake
On 6th January, it's the Feast of the Epiphany. In Luxembourg, it is known asDräikinneksdag, which literally means "Three Kings Day". On this occasion, people in Luxembourg eat aDräikinnekskuch(Three Kings Cake) - a traditional pastry with frangipane. But there is more to it - a little surprise is hidden inside the cake.
King or Queen for a day
The Feast of the Epiphany is a Christian feast tocelebrate the arrival of the three wise men, Melchior, Gaspar and Balthasar, who came to see baby Jesus. According to the Gospel of Matthew, the three kings followed the star from Bethlehem to the birthplace of Jesus to give him gold, frankincense and myrrh.
On this occasion, aDräikinnekskuchis served in many households. It is made with puff pastry traditionally filled with frangipane, although chocolate, apple and even meat variants exist. To create your own cake,follow our delicious recipeprovided by Luxembourg food blogger Merlanne.
According to tradition, abean is hidden inside the cake. Whoever gets the slice containing the bean becomes theking or queen of the day.As such, they have the right to wear the crown, that is associated with the cake. It is very often made of gilded cardboard and purchased with the cake, when you buy it at a local bakery. Naturally, the inquisitive follow with great interest the slicing of the cake to spot the bean.
Be careful by the way – these days, the beans usually come in the form of porcelain figurines. Fans who are too eager might damage their teeth. Traditionally, these were religious figures, but today there is no limit to the imagination.
Last update04.01.2024
Bake your own Dräikinnekskuch
Liichtmëssdag: the unique Customs of Luxembourg's Candlemas celebration
Buergbrennen - let's burn winter together
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/easter-tradition-luxembourg.html
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
The Easter bunny and the egg hunt - around Easter, Luxembourg is full of events and traditions that are well known in the world. But have you ever heard of theJaudesor theÉimaischen? This is how Easter is celebrated in Luxembourg.
A religious festival
In Luxembourg, where the majority of the population is Christian, Easter, the commemoration of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, isone of the most important annual festivals.
A large proportion of practising Christians attend mass on Holy Thursday (Gréngendonneschden), Good Friday (Karfreiden) and Holy Saturday (Karsamsden), as well as the Matins of the Resurrection on Easter Sunday (Ouschtersonnden).
A family celebration
But Easter is also a family celebration. As in most countries, theEaster Bunny and Easter eggs are an integral part of Easterin the Grand Duchy.
The eggs are first cooked, then coloured andhidden by theOuschterhues(Easter Bunny). Children then have great fun finding them as part of the traditional egg hunt.  Today, chicken eggs are increasingly replaced with chocolate eggs.
Before eating their eggs, children playTécken(the battle of the eggs), in which a child hits their painted egg against that of their neighbour. The child whose egg remains intact wins.
Luxembourgish traditions
Klibberen
According to legend,the church bells fly off to Romeafter mass on Holy Thursday to receive the Pope’s Easter blessing.
It is therefore upto the youngsters of the village to call the faithful to prayer withtheirKlibber(ratchet), a small wooden percussion instrument made with a toothed wheel that, when cranked, repeatedly strikes a flexible wooden strip. As it turns, they sing theKlibberlidd(ratchet song): "Dik-dik-dak, dik-dik-dak, haut as Ouschterdaag"(dik-dik-dak, dik-dik-dak, today is Easter).
As a reward,the youngsters are given Easter eggs and sometimes moneyby local people on the morning of Easter Sunday.
The custom ofJaudes
The custom ofJaudes(celebration of the Dog Rose) is a local tradition of Vianden, an Ardennes town in the north of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, celebrated on Good Friday.
Jaudesrefers to both the festival and toa bouquet of wild rose thorns, paper flowers, ribbons,etc. According to custom, after completing their bouquet, boys from Vianden go to their neighbourhood at noon and burn theirJaudes.
This tradition, celebrated since the Middle Ages, isinspired by the Apostle Judas.Its purpose is to show the people’s disapproval of the apostle who betrayed Jesus and whose fate was to be condemned, symbolically, to hell.
The Pretzel and the lovers’ egg
Women who received a pretzel onBretzelsonndeg(Pretzel Sunday) are supposed to givean Easter egg in returnon Easter Sunday as asign of their love.
Éimaischenand thePéckvillercher
On Easter Monday, the traditionalÉimaischen(Feast of Emmaus) takes place. It is a popular folk festival celebrated in the old quarter of Luxembourg City and in the village of Nospelt.
TheÉimaischenis primarily a traditional market where folk groups and all sorts of handicraft are waiting to be discovered. It is famously known for itsPéckvillecher, terracotta birds which imitate the cuckoo's calling when you blow into them. The origin of theÉimaischenas the potters’ market in Luxembourg City dates back to at least the 19th century.
TheÉimaischenrecalls the march of Jesus Christ’s disciples to Emmaus, the Palestine village near Jerusalem where Christ appeared to two of them before his resurrection.
Public holidays and school holidays
Easter is celebrated on the Sunday following the first full moon of spring. The festival is always between 22 March and 25 April, which corresponds to the end of the second trimester for all children in fundamental school and insecondary education, who then enjoy two weeks’ school holidays.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Meekranz and Labour Day: celebrating Spring and workers
Our Lady of Fatima Pilgrimage: Honoring Heritage and Faith
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/our-lady-fatima.html
Our Lady of Fatima Pilgrimage: Honoring Heritage and Faith
Every Ascension Thursday, nearly 20,000 faithful, most of them from the Portuguese community, take part in the pilgrimage to the shrine of Our Lady of Fatima above Wiltz. They thus pay homage to Our Lady of Fatima, the Virgin Mary who appeared six times in 1917 to three children in Fatima, a small village in central Portugal.
Portuguese immigrants create their own tradition
The fact that thepilgrimage became a proper popular festival and a tradition is owed to thePortuguese community in Luxembourg. In 1968, around a hundred members of that community launched the first pilgrimage. They were essentially immigrant workers of the 1960s, for whom the sanctuary represented a link with their homeland.
Besides the religious aspect, which remains very significant, the pilgrimage has become areally popular festival and an opportunity to meet family and friends. Today, the majority of pilgrims are still part of the Portuguese immigrant community, but the event is becoming more and more inter-cultural.
Luxembourgish origins
The history of the sanctuary dates back to dark days, whenfierce battles devastated the region in the winter of 1944-1945.Northern Luxembourg became the epicentre of thelast German offensive, known as the 'Battle of the Bulge'. A group of parishioners, having takenrefuge in a cave, promised to build a sanctuary dedicated to the Virgin Mary if fate was kind to them.
They emerged unharmed and the sanctuary was built in 1951. It was built in the honour of Fatima, the statue of whom was transported across Europe to give strength to believers.The sanctuary's official inauguration was held on 13 July 1952.
Last update23.05.2025
For more information
Population
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/echternach-hopping-procession.html
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
On Whit Tuesday each year, the ancient abbey town of Echternach hosts the hopping procession, which is called theSprangpressessiounin Luxembourgish. This local tradition attracts thousands of pilgrims every year from across the Grand Duchy and neighbouring countries to celebrate the cult of Saint Willibrord.
A pilgrimage with its own special tune
Early in the morning, the first pilgrims gather in the shadow of the main courtyard of the former abbey of Echternach. They meet to take part in a truly unique event. Both, participants and spectators, come to pay homage toSaint Willibrord, an Anglo-Saxon Benedictine monk, revered as the founder of Echternach Abbeyand honoured for his gift of curing illness.
Those who take part in the hopping procession skip through the streets of the city and use the whole body to enter into prayer. The pilgrims celebrate the cult of St. Willibrord by walking but mainly by hopping to the rhythm of musical bands.
Before the start of theSprangpressessioun, a mass is celebrated in the basilica. At the end of mass, the Archbishop of Luxembourg issues a greeting to those in attendance and then the dancers, lined up in rows of five to six people, take their positions. Dressed in white and black or blue, they all hold a white handkerchief in their hand. They advance through the town, while making small hopping movements to the rhythm of aSprangpressessiounmelody: one step to the left, one step to the right.
With these simple steps, the pilgrims, accompanied by municipal ensembles and brass bands which play the same melody, hop through the streets of the abbey town. At the end of the procession, which in general lasts about an hour, the dancers and spectators gather together at the basilica. According to the tradition, they parade one by one past the tomb of Saint Willibrord. A thanksgiving service brings the event to a close.
An event with international appeal
Each year, thisfamous procession attracts about 10,000 pilgrims and spectatorsfrom Luxembourg and neighbouring countries such as France, Belgium, Germany and even the Netherlands to celebrate this religious festival which has become a cultural phenomenon over the years. Since the end of the 15th century, this completely unique event has made Echternach world-famous andsince 2010 theSprangpressessiounhas been included inUNESCO's Intangible Heritage of Humanity.
Last update06.08.2024
For more information
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
Celebrate National Day: Join the Festivities for the Grand Duke's Birthday in Luxembourg!
Bretzelsonndeg - a pretzel for love
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/christmas.html
Christmas - a time of togetherness
Coming together is what Christmas is all about in Luxembourg. Even though the country is rooted in Christian traditions, Christmas has evolved thanks to the many cultural influences. The cross-community event that it is today embodies the values many Luxembourgers hold dear to their hearts: family, togetherness and thankfulness for the peace we live in. Let us show you our traditions.
Waiting for Christmas time
The run-up towards Christmas is filled with anticipation and much preparation for the festive season.
NumerousChristmas markets, processions, cribs, illuminated streets, decorated shops, concerts and other events create a magical festive atmosphere throughout the country. Luxembourg City, for example, creates a winter festival atmosphere with itsWinterlightsfestival, providing a unifying theme for a whole series of advent festivities: a Christmas Parade, Christmas markets, public concerts, exhibitions and a variety of other events.
In the weeks preceding Christmas,dedicated events are also held in nurseries, fundamental schools, homes for the elderly, sports clubs, etc. Christmas concerts take place in churches, schools and on the Christmas markets adding to the festive pre-Christmas flair that many people enjoy.
At home,families enjoy the preparation of Christmas biscuits and decorations are put upaccording to each family's tradition:
And when this atmosphere is enhanced by a snow-covered landscape,Luxembourgers enjoy a perfect Christmas.
Season's Greetings 2025 (Video/Audio YouTube)
100% Made in Luxembourg by Blomst and music by Joël Heyard
©LMIH
Religious celebrations
In Luxembourg, themajority of people are Christians. To celebrate Christmas,practising Christians attend mass— either midnight mass(Metten) on 24 December, orChristmas mass on 25 December. A particularly beautiful midnight mass is celebrated every year atNotre-Dame Cathedral in Luxembourg. After mass, churchgoers take a moment to enjoy each others' company, with aGlühwäin(mulled wine) or other hot drink to keep warm, before going home to prepare for Christmas Day.
In many villages, theKrëppespiller(nativity plays), performed by children of the parish, are one of the highlights of the season. They usually take place in the churches and are attended by large crowds.
While there are certain Luxembourgish traditions and customs,the many foreign communities in Luxembourghave also introduced their own customs to the country.
Coming together as families
Christmas is also a family celebration taking place on 24 (Hellegowend), 25 (Chrëschtdag) and 26 December (Stiefesdag). These three days are traditionally devoted to family get-togethers, but every family has their own way of celebrating. Some gather on the evening of 24 December, while others hold their big Christmas dinner on the 25th. The variety of dishes is as eclectic as the many cultural influences in Luxembourg, including traditional Luxembourgish foods, such as venison, trout or beef.
Of course,handing out and receiving presents is an important part of Christmas. Traditionally,theCrëschtkëndchen(baby Jesus) brings the gifts and leaves them under the Christmas tree. In some families, presents are opened on Christmas Eve (24 December), while in others they are opened on Christmas Day (25 December). Most importantly though, families gather on Christmas Day for an opulent meal and to spend time together.
The final day of Christmas,26 December, is usually a day of resting, maybe dedicated to meeting friends or visiting family.
Traditional dishes you need to try
Christmas time is also when different traditional (or sometimes less traditional) simple foods are consumed for various occasions:
Public holidays and school holidays
Christmas is one of the most important holidays for many Luxembourgers andChrëschtdag(Christmas Day) on 25 December andStiefesdag(Boxing Day) on 26 December are legal holidays.
Most shops, banks and businesses close on the afternoon of 24 December and remainclosed on 25 and 26 December. Childrenin fundamental and secondary education, for their part, enjoy 2 weeks of school holidays.
Last update23.12.2025
For more information
Christmas markets to discover
Kleeschen: déballer les délicieuses coutumes de la Saint-Nicolas
The Christmas log
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/meekranz-labour-day.html
Meekranz and Labour Day: celebrating Spring and workers
From Labour Day gatherings, to barbecues with friends and family, to theMeekranzandMaitranktraditions celebrated across the country: 1 May is the day for get-togethers in Luxembourg!
Wreaths of leaves to welcome springtime
On 1 May, to celebrate the arrival of spring and the sunny season,wreaths of green foliageappear all over the villages and towns of Luxembourg. They are made by local associations or individuals todecorate homes, local government buildings or other public places.
In the past, actual maypole trees were erected, but nowadays many Luxembourgers simply braid theirMeekranzwith young twigs picked from the forest.
As the weather is often good on this holiday, many Luxembourgers take the opportunity to see each other. Whether you are invited to abarbecue or to one of the many local festivals, make the most of the good weather and the friendly atmosphere!
To celebrate the day,we like to toast with a glass ofMaitrank. Made with sweet woodruff, it is a refreshing drink that is especially famous in the West of Luxembourg and in the surroundings of Arlon in Belgium.
It is also customary tooffer a sprig of lily of the valley to your loved ones on May 1st. This fragrant flower with its many white bells symbolises the return of spring and fine weather. It is offered as a good luck charm.
Trade Union events
May Day,Labour Day, is also a day of international importance. In Luxembourg, one remembers thestruggle led by the free trade unions for social achievements, in particular the regulation of working hours, paid holidays and the social protection of employees.
The agenda of the trade union celebrations therefore includes apublic reminder of the current demands of the various associations. These events often recall popular festivals.
Good to know!
TheFestival of Labour andFest der Arbeit und der Kulturen | OGBLCulturesatNeimënsteris an event not to be missed. This festival features concerts, workshops for children and shows. It is organised by the trade union known as OGB-L in collaboration with the associations ASTI and ASTM. Thepublic event of the LCGB, another large-scale trade union in Luxembourg, takes place at a different location every year.
Last update06.08.2024
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Maitrank
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/oktav.html
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
TheOktav, which is celebrated in honour of the Virgin Mary, is one of the main religious events of the year. Over the period of a fortnight in April and May, parishes from all over the country, as well as from the Eifel region in Germany, the Belgian Province of Luxembourg and France's Lorraine region, embark on a pilgrimage to Luxembourg's capital. They visit the statue of the Virgin Mary in the Cathedral of Notre-Dame de Luxembourg and then eat at theMäertchen, which literally translates as the "little market".
A fortnight of pilgrimage
On thethird Sunday after Easter, thousands of devoted Catholics make their way to Luxembourg City. For a fortnight, Notre-Dame Cathedral becomes the centre of the pilgrimage to the Virgin Mary, who is venerated as the patron saint of Luxembourg.
Most of Luxembourg's parishes organise pilgrimages.Pilgrims arrive at the outskirts of the city, in large numbers, and then form processions to make their way to the cathedral while praying. Several masses are held in the cathedral every day during the pilgrimage. Theprogrammeincludes masses for families, linguistic communities, schools and the blessing of children by the cardinal. Each year, the Oktav has a different theme, which influences the sermons.
To mark the occasion,the cathedral is splendidly decorated, and the statue of the Virgin Mary and baby Jesus is dressed accordingly.
And let's not forgetthe marketOktavsmäertchenwhich occupies theKnuedler(Place Guillaume II). Thislittle market is closely tied to the religious tradition. After visiting the Cathedral, pilgrims can head to the market to enjoy a drink or some food, and to buy a souvenir among the various ornaments and articles on offer.
The end of theOktavis marked by afinal solemn procession, during which the statue of the Virgin Mary is carried through the streets of the capital. Believers in the processions are joined by representatives of the Grand Ducal family, the Government, the Chamber of Deputies, the courts of justice, and other public institutions.
Impressions de l'Oktav
The closing procession of the Oktav sees the Virgin Mary statue from the cathedral carried around the city centre in a solemn procession.
© intranet.cathol.lu / Roger Nilles - CC BY-NC-ND
The whole cathedral is festively decorated for the Octave - this is especially true of the statue of the Virgin Mary.
© Toute la cathédrale est décorée de manière festive à l'occasion de l'Octave - c'est particulièrement vrai pour la statue de la Vierge.
In addition to the masses for pilgrim communities, there are also devotions, prayers and blessings.
© SIP
It is not only pilgrims who can fortify themselves on the Mäertchen. The Gromperekichelcher are such an indispensable speciality.
© SIP / Jean-Christophe Verhaegen
During the octave, masses are held several times a day.
© Während der Oktav finden mehrmals täglich Messen statt.
Visitors can rest and share a meal under a big structure that protects them from the sun. While traditional foods like Gromperekichelcher or sausages are still served a lot, foods from other national backgrounds have become equally popular.
© SIP
Not only local faith communities, but also the language communities of Luxembourg - here believers from Portugal and Cabo Verde - go on pilgrimage to the Virgin Mary.
© Jean-Paul Kieffer / SIP
The closing of the Oktav always draws crowds to Luxembourg City.
© intranet.cathol.lu / Roger Nilles - CC BY-NC-ND
A long-standing tradition
The pilgrimage dates back to1624, when the country was suffering from the Plague. The provincial council  chose Mary,Mother of God, as the country’s patron saint and protector, and as Consoler of the Afflicted (consolatrix afflictorum). From that moment on, the country’s inhabitants would make annual pilgrimages to the Glacis chapel outside the city gates to ask to be cured of illnesses. Later, the statue was moved to Notre-Dame de Luxembourg Cathedral, where it can still be seen today on its gilded votive altar.
The Virgin Mary was elected patron saint of Luxembourg in 1666.
Traditionally, the Oktav lasted only eight days - hence the origin of the name. Festive processions would make their way to the capital from far afield and pilgrims would endure considerable hardships to pay homage to the Blessed Virgin.
Last update07.05.2025
For more information
Our Lady of Fatima Pilgrimage: Honoring Heritage and Faith
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/liichtmesdag-candlemasday-custom-luxembourg.html
Liichtmëssdag: the unique Customs of Luxembourg's Candlemas celebration
On 2nd February, the eve of St. Blaise's day, children celebrateLiichtmëssdag(Candlemas). They  go  from door to door, bearingLiichtebengelcheror lanterns, singing in exchange for sweets and coins. On this occasion, they sing a traditional song known by all children that starts with "Léiwer Härgottsblieschen".
Peas and bacon
After school or in the early afternoon, childrenget hold of theirLiichtebengelcherbefore leaving in groups to ask for sweets and coins. Generally speaking, these groups are made by children living in the same neighbourhood or on the same street. In the olden days, children would carry candles at the end of a wooden stick, but for safety reasons, they were replaced with colourful lanterns lit with an electric bulb.
This colourful procession goes from house to house.When someone opens their door, the children sing their songLéiwer Härgottsblieschen, with which they literally ask for "bacon and peas". Who can possibly resist a group of little ones bearing lanterns and singing wholeheartedly?
At the end of their path, the donations are shared fairly among the children who were longing for this moment to enjoy the result of their joint efforts.
A call to Saint Blaise
The origins of theLiichtmëssdagdate back to the pre-Christian era, but today, the festival is associated with Saint Blaise, one of the Fourteen Holy Helpers that are venerated in Roman Catholicism. He is said to protect not only cattle, but also to help fight sore throats, ulcers and the plague. The children's passage with their lanterns serves as a reminder that Christ defined himself as the light of the world who brings light in darkness.
If you want to chime in, here's the text of the song:
Léiwer Härgottsblieschen,Gitt ons Speck an IerbessenEe Pond, zwee Pond,Dat anert Joer da gitt der gesond,Da gitt der gesond.Loosst déi jonk Leit liewenLoosst déi al Leit stierwen,(Variante: an déi al derniewent)Kommt der net bal,D'Féiss ginn ons kal.Kommt Der net gläich,Da gi mer op d'Schläich.Kommt der net geschwënn,D'Féiss ginn ons dënn.Kommt Der net gewëss,Da kritt Der e Schouss voll Nëss.
Version of Nik Welter (1929)
Liichtmëssdag (Video/Audio)
Children in Luxembourg singing "Léiwer Härgottsblieschen". (Copyright: CNA)
Last update04.02.2026
For more information
Buergbrennen - let's burn winter together
Fuesent: masked balls and cavalcades
Verwurrelter: the knotted treat for Carnival season
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/geenzefest.html
Geenzefest: Wiltz's colorful broom festival
Each Whit Monday, the town of Wiltz in the Ardennes region comes to life for the Broom Festival. Known as theGënzefestorGeenzefestin local dialect, the festival honours the broom, a bush with yellow flowers that grows abundantly on the hills of theÉislekregion in the north of Luxembourg. Thousands of spectators visit the town to have fun and especially to see the Broom Queen and her parade.
The festival of the golden landscape
In the month of May, the Luxembourg landscape is dotted with bright yellow bushes that adorn the meadows and forests and remind us that summer is coming.The name of this plant is broom, and in northern Luxembourg it has its very own festival. EveryWhit Monday, a "Broom Festival" orGeenzefesttakes place in Wiltz, the town affectionately known as the "capital of the Ardennes".
Originally devised as a festival to celebrate the beauty of the local landscape, over the years theGeenzefesthas become one ofLuxembourg's major folk festivals, attracting nearly 10,000 people to the streets of Wiltz every year.
TheGeenzefestis organised by the association "Les Amis de la féerie du genêt de Wiltz" (the friends of the Broom Festival of Wiltz). It is best known forits impressive flowering broom parade: over 40 floats and national and international folk music bands parade through the streets of the town on Whit Monday.
Entertainment for all
On top of the floweringbroom parade, the Whit weekend features an extensive programme of entertainment: exhibitions, the crowning of the Broom Queen, a flea market, folk displays, concerts, shows and the broom dance – there is something in store for everyone.
Celebrated since 1948, the Broom Festival was an idea of photographer Tony Mander and his friends. Their objective was to celebrate the beauty of the landscape and celebrate the singing, music and folklore of the Ardennes. At this time of the year, broom bathes theEislek's landscapes in shades of golden yellow.
Last update13.08.2024
For more information
Top 5: Wine and grape festivals in Luxembourg for celebrating along the Moselle
The Oktav: pilgrimage in honour of Luxembourg's patron saint - the Virgin Mary
Léiffrawëschdag: a unique harvest festival in Greiveldange
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/carnival.html
Fuesent: masked balls and cavalcades
Like our neighbours, Luxembourgers love to celebrate Carnival. Between Candlemas Day (Liichtmëssdagon 2 February) and Ash Wednesday (Äschermëttwoch) Luxembourg lives the craziest season of the year.
Maskedballs, parades and cavalcades for both children and adults are organised by Luxembourgish associations, ensuring the proper amusement of everyone who likes to celebrate Carnival. Almost every village in Luxembourg organises at least one ball, transforming Luxembourg's streets into a giant festive area with food, drinks and fun.
Cavalcades and masked balls everywhere you look!
Over the entire Carnival period, the associations in the Grand Duchy organise severalcavalcades, complete with music, food and drinks, in order to celebrate Carnival properly.
Thebest-known cavalcades throughout Luxembourg arethose in:
Even though all cavalcades are child-friendly, oneespecially for childrentakes place every year in Kayl.
Masked ballson the other hand will take place in almost every village, town or city in Luxembourg, from children's balls in most villages to the bigger parties in, for instance, Esch, Bettendorf or Differdange.
For the occasion, all kinds of disguises are popular in Luxembourg, from clowns and withces, to escaped prisoners, fairies and unicornsthere really is no end to the imagination with which people choose their disguise.
Come for the mood, stay for the food
The several balls, parades and cavalcades throughout Luxembourg do not only offer amusement and the celebration of Carnival, but also include a multitude of typical LuxembourgishCarnival snacks and pastriessuch as:
Hold on to your tie!
Luxembourg's Carnival period is rife with special days and events to watch out for:
Fat Thursday opens this list. On this Thursday before Carnival Sunday, the rather fatty culinary specialties described above are traditionally served. However, its notoriety comes from the fact thatgangs of dressed-up women will be roaming the streets of many of Luxembourg’s major carnival towns. If you happen to stumble upon one of them, and you are wearing a tie, chances are that you will have it cut off among cheers and laughter.
On Carnival Sunday (Fuessonndeg) and Carnival Monday (Fuesméindeg), Luxembourg’s calendaris filled with cavalcadesand masked balls.
It all ends onÄschermëttwoch, when the people in Remich, a town on the Moselle, burn an effigy of winteron the bridge spanning the river. This straw man (Stréimännchen) is replaced by a straw woman (Stréifrächen) in leap years.
However, contrary to our German neighbours, Luxembourgers don't take this official ending of the Carnival period too seriously. Indeed,many balls and cavalcades can still take place later during the season.
Last update04.02.2026
For more information
Bretzelsonndeg - a pretzel for love
Nonnefäscht: sweet treats for carnival
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/leiffraweschdag.html
Léiffrawëschdag: a unique harvest festival in Greiveldange
In August, it is the flowering season in the countryside and harvesting time is approaching. In the olden days, Luxembourgers would gather on Assumption Day on 15 August to have a range of plants on which they depended blessed by the local priest, hoping for a plentiful harvest. In the village of Greiveldange - in the Moselle region - this day known asLéiffrawëschdagis always the perfect opportunity to organise a proper popular festival.
A feast of harvest
What lies behind the nameLéiffrawëschdag? For that day ("Dag"in Luxembourgish), peopleprepare a sheaf or "Wësch", made up of different herbs, cereals and garden vegetables.The "Wësch"can be made up of up to 35 herbs, vegetables and grains.
TheWëschwas thenblessed as part of a religious ceremony, followed by a procession in the honour of the Virgin Mary ("Léif Fra"). TheWëschwas then hung in the stable where it was meant toprotect the cattle.
In former times, this tradition that coincides with Assumption Day on 15th August was observed in all villages. Only a few villages still practice the blessing of herbs today, includingthe village of Greiveldange in the Moselle region. The feast of Greiveldange's inhabitants enjoys a certain amount of recognition.
In fact, the villagers of Greiveldange brought theLéiffrawëschdagback to life. This beautiful small village in the Moselle regionattracts thousands of visitors each yearand mobilises local associations, including the non-profit associationGreiweldenger Leit, to animate the streets of the village for the enjoyment of the young and old alike.
Concerts and gastronomical delights
The festivities start as follows: a mass is celebrated before lunchtime, during which a sheaf of herbs is blessed.
Then, a lunchtime mealmade up of typically Luxembourgish dishes: roast ham, broad beans and potatoes with bacon,Wënzerteller(vintner's plate: ham, sausage, cheese, paté, aspic...),  paired with wines and sparkling wines of local wine estates and producers - it is the Moselle after all!
Throughout the day, variouscraftsmenpresent and sell their bucolic creations, among others, as part of a handicraft market. Varioustastingsof local produce also await you. Guests can enjoy anextensive music programme and old-fashionedgames late into the night. And it's allfree of charge!
Last update08.08.2024
For more information
Schueberfouer – three weeks of funfair in summer
Célébrez la Fête nationale : Rejoignez les festivités à l’occasion de l’anniversaire du Grand-Duc au Luxembourg!
Geenzefest: Wiltz's colorful broom festival
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/kleeschen.html
Kleeschen: unwrapping the delightful customs of St. Nicholas Day
On 6 December, all the children throughout the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg eagerly await the arrival of theKleeschen(St Nicholas) and the gifts he brings. Unfortunately, his companion theHousekeris always by his side, carrying a big bag from which he may pull a present or a twig.
TheKleeschenand theHouseker
In Luxembourg,theKleeschentakes the form of an old man with white hair and a white beard, dressed in red. Unlike Father Christmas, St Nicholas wears a red bishop's mitre on his head and carries a bishop's crosier, a sort of staff.
He is usuallyaccompanied by theHouseker(similar to the concept of Black Peter), his fear-inspiring dark companion, who gives twigs to children who have misbehaved.
In the Grand Duchy, this day is so important that the Ministry of National Education has decided todeclare it a holiday for children in fundamental education.During the run-up to 6 December, theKleeschenvisits classes and entire schools, bringing great joy to children.
From the end of November,children leave their slippers outside their bedroom doors every night for theKleeschento first bring them sweets and then, during the night between 5 and 6 December, proper presents (toys and treats). In general, he does not allow himself to be seen by small children, who discover all their gifts early in the morning.
Last update10.11.2025
Christmas - a time of togetherness
Buergbrennen - let's burn winter together
Liichtmëssdag: the unique Customs of Luxembourg's Candlemas celebration
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/pretzel-sunday.html
Bretzelsonndeg - a pretzel for love
OnBretzelsonndeg, or Pretzel Sunday, women are given this famous puff pastry with sugar icing and almonds as a token of love. If the feelings are mutual, their loved one will be given an egg at Easter. Otherwise the man will receive an empty basket, the origin of the expression "De Kuerf kréien": being dumped. In leap years, the tradition is reversed.
A gourmet "I love you"
Bretzelsonndegis celebrated on the fourth Sunday of Lent and marks the end of the first half of this period of religious observance. Save the date,because if you forget it, it could have a negative impact on your love life! This is why men, above all, rush to the pastry shops and bakeries in Luxembourg on this particular Sunday morning tooffer a sweet pretzel to their loved one.
In fact, onBretzelsonndeg,the man traditionally offers one of the fine pastriesas a token of his feelings. If the feeling is mutual,he will receive an egg in return on Easter Sunday. Previously, the man would receive a hen's egg, however chocolate eggs, sometimes filled with pralines from Luxembourg's master confectioners, have become more popular in recent times.If not, he is given an empty basket, hence the Luxembourg expression "De Kuerf kréien", which translates as "receiving a basket" and means that one has been dumped.
But be aware of the exception to this rule: in leap years, the tradition is reversed and the woman offers the pretzel!
Pretzels area Luxembourg specialty, made of puff pastry covered with fondant icing and almonds, representing two lovers arm in arm. Although pretzels were originally savoury (salted), the sweet version is more common nowadays.
Last update10.03.2026
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
Meekranz and Labour Day: celebrating Spring and workers
Kniddelen
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/national-day.html
Celebrate National Day: Join the Festivities for the Grand Duke's Birthday in Luxembourg!
It's National Day in Luxembourg! This celebration of the Grand Duke's birthday is a great opportunity for everyone to gather for festivities organised across the entire country on the 22nd and 23rd of June. Every year, people come together to show their connection to the Grand Duchy and celebrate their home and its traditions. A perfect occasion for two days filled with concerts, fireworks, games for children, and commemorative ceremonies.
Popular festivals galore
Luxembourg's National Day celebrations span two days, with a host of popular celebrations and a series of formal events that draw large crowds. The changing of the guard, torchlit procession and military parade are favourites of residents and visitors alike, while the official secular and religious ceremonies provide emotional moments that foster unity.
The event that is traditionally seen as the start of celebrations takes place at4 p.m. on June 22nd with the traditional changing of the guard in front of the Grand Ducal Palace.This formal event marks the relief of the current detachment assuming guard duties by a new detachment and takes place three times a year. For the occasion, the new detachment is musically escorted by the Luxembourg Military Band.
At the same time,members of the Grand Ducal family are visiting the country. While Their Royal Highnesses the Grand Duke and Grand Duchess visit a different town each year, the Hereditary Grand Duke and Grand Duchess always visit Esch-sur-Alzette, the country's second largest city. These events are always a highlight that takes the form of a popular festival, where people come together to welcome them.
Torchlight procession and fireworks
The eve of Luxembourg's National Day is above all a time for festivities. Numerous popular events are organised across the entire country. The programme is so loaded that wherever you are, you can be sure that you will be among the festivities.
One of the main events of the evening is undoubtedly theFakelzuch(torchlight procession). This is a parade where national and local associations march together through the City of Luxembourg and pass by Grand Duke Henri and Grand Duchess Maria Teresa who are seated on a stand. The popularity of this tradition is evident not only in the size of the procession, which counts around 2,500 participants, but also in the variety of participating groups. From scouts to sports clubs to brass bands and folklore groups, various associations participate in this parade, reflecting the diversity of Luxembourgish society.
The evening's stunning finale takes place at 11 p.m., as the sky above the Adolphe Bridge bursts into flames with a spectacular fireworks display. A long-awaited moment by thousands of people each year!
Glimpses of the National Day
The festivities begin with the changing of the guard in front of the Grand Ducal Palace by a detachment of honour on the 22nd of June, the eve of National Day.
© SIP / Jean-Christophe Verhaegen
On the evening of 22 June, a torchlight procession lights up the centre of Luxembourg City.
© SIP / Anthony Dehez
This procession is attended not only by various Luxembourg societies, but also by groups from the various foreign communities in Luxembourg.
© SIP / Anthony Dehez
The procession passes in front of the grandstand, where the Grand Duke and Grand Duchess have taken their seats to watch the parade.
© SIP / Anthony Dehez
Following the official part, the city centre is transformed into a gigantic party area, the same as in other localities throughout the Grand Duchy.
© SIP / Charles Caratini
The fireworks, which are launched from the Adolphe Bridge at 11 pm, light up the sky for almost 20 minutes.
© LMIH / Focalize
The festivities on June 23 begin with the official ceremony at the Philharmonie, featuring speeches by HRH the Grand Duke, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, and the Minister of State.
© SIP / Jean-Christophe Verhaegen
During the event, honorary distinctions are awarded, as shown here to the journalist Philip Crowther in 2022. A concert by the Philharmonic Orchestra brings the event to a close.
© Maison du Grand-Duc / Sophie Margue
21 cannon shots from the height of the Fetschenhof follow the ceremony in the Philharmonie.
© Armée luxembourgeoise
The military parade, or "taking up arms", always draws large crowds. At noon, the Grand Duke and the Hereditary Grand Duke review the troops in the Avenue de la Libérté.
© SIP / Emmanuel Claude
Army and police detachments then parade past the podium where the Head of State is seated.
© SIP / Emmanuel Claude
Detachments from the Grand Ducal Fire and Rescue Corps (CGDIS), among others, complete the procession. A key moment was also the overflight by an A400M aircraft piloted by Luxembourg officers.
© SIP / Jean-Christophe Verhaegen
The celebrations conclude with the Te Deum at Notre-Dame Cathedral.
© SIP / Jean-Christophe Verhaegen
Ceremonies, parade and events
Theprogramme for National Day starts on 23rd June at 10 a.m. with an official ceremony at the Luxembourg Philharmonie. First and foremost, it is an occasion for the Grand Duke, the Prime Minister and the President of the Chamber of Deputies to address the nation. Another emotional highlight is the presentation of awards to deserving Luxembourgers.
It goes without saying that the Philharmonie goes hand in hand with concerts. In fact, theofficial ceremony ends with music played by the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra.Each year, the honour of creating this musical piece goes to a different composer.
The ceremony in the Philharmonie isfollowed by the traditional 21-gun salute fired in the Grand Duke's honour.
At noon, the ceremonial drill and military parade on theAvenue de la Liberté(also known asNei Avenue) always draw crowds, with spectators lining the boulevard to watch the troops march. Representatives of the army, police, customs, Grand Ducal Fire and Rescue Corps, as well as the prison administration, Red Cross and music bands of the Grand Duke Adolphe Union participate in the parade. Luxembourg military planes fly over the parade at low altitude.
The official programme ends withthe traditional Te Deum in the late afternoonatNotre-Dame de LuxembourgCathedral, attended by members of the Grand Ducal family.
Entertainment for everybody
Last update19.06.2025
For more information
The Grand Duke
National symbols
National anthem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/buergbrennen-bonfire-carnival.html
Buergbrennen - let's burn winter together
On the first Sunday after Carnival, theBuergen(torches) are lit across the Grand Duchy to chase away the winter. Every year, this traditional festive occasion brings together crowds of people in municipalities throughout the country, with neighbours, the local who's who, clubs and associations gathering around the bonfire, a glass ofGlühwäinin their hand.
Fed up with winter!
Each village has their own. They can be of bigger or smaller scale.TheBuergenthat are lit up on the country's hillsonBuergsonndeg– the first Sundayafter carnival– arehuge stakeswhose mission is to chase away the winter. They come in various forms – sometimes, they look like a small castle, but most of them take the form of a giant bonfire with a cross in the middle.
The combustible materials most commonly used are straw, brushwood and logs, but old Christmas trees are also used. These are collected by local clubs and associations in January. The size of theBuergenoften depends on the materials that have been amassed. In most cases, they are erected by local youth associations, who sometimes also organise apopular festival next to theBuerg, which they then set alight before the crowd's eyes after dark.
A custom that brings the village together
The event usually starts during the afternoon with the construction of the Buerg, followed by atorchlight procession, and ending with the lighting of the fire as darkness falls. In some places, the honour of lighting theBuerggoes to the most recently married local couple, or to a local celebrity.
Barbecues and traditional dishes includingIerzebulli(pea soup),Bouneschlupp(green bean soup) andGlühwäin(mulled wine) are served to warm up the audience, and often, the festival goes on long after the stake has been reduced to embers.
Burning Manin Remich
In this charming town, located in the heart of the Moselle region, the inhabitants have their own traditional way of chasing winter away and marking the end of the carnival season. During the days leading up to Ash Wednesday, alife-size straw doll, dressed in old clothes – theStréimännchen, or "straw man" – is created. As this is supposed to represent a reveller, orFuesbok, after the Sunday of the carnival he’s given an empty bottle of wine or crémant to hold, together with an empty wallet.On Wednesday evening, the doll is carried in a procession through the streets to the bridge spanning the Moselle. Before the assembled crowd, it is then set on fire and thrown into the river.. This marks the end of the carnival season and the beginning of Lent.
Although the doll usually represents a man, in leap years it represents a woman and is then calledStréifrächen, literally "straw woman".
Origins
Originally, theBuergbrennenorFaaschtefeier(Lent Festival)used to be a pagan custom.
Since ancient times, theBuergbrennentradition has been observed around the time of the spring equinox. The blazesymbolises the rebirth of spring and the end of winter, the triumph of warm over cold, of light over darkness. Nevertheless, it is also sometimes said that the burning of theBuergis a symbolic reminder of the time when witches were burnt at the stake.
Last update14.01.2026
For more information
Bretzelsonndeg - a pretzel for love
Liichtmëssdag: the unique Customs of Luxembourg's Candlemas celebration
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/schueberfouer.html
Schueberfouer – three weeks of funfair in summer
TheSchueberfoueris the unmissable event of the summer in Luxembourg. Each year, 2 million visitors enjoy themselves amidst aromas of grilled almonds, fried fish andGromperekichelcher(potato fritters). As part of this festival, whose origins date back to the Middle Ages, a multitude of rides and game stalls attract the young and old for 3 weeks, from the end of August to the beginning of September.
Rides and culinary delights
TheSchueberfouer– or simplyFouer– dates back to 1340. It is the biggest funfair in the Grand Duchy and the Greater Region. Each year, in late August and early September, almost two million people visit the 10-acre funfair on the Glacis, where almost 3.5 km of funfair rides and other attractions are on offer.A unique mix in Europe of 200 attractions, including 25 gigantic high-adrenalin rides, more than a dozen attractions for young children, nearly as many restaurants and a host of brasseries, sweet stalls, lotteries, shooting ranges, etc. It's a must!
Small stalls with all kinds of merchandisecan still be found lining theAlléeScheffer, where all sorts of items can be purchased, from nougat to grilled almonds, from Central African ebony sculptures to whisks and from magic tin-openers to old-fashioned CDs.
As usual in funfairs, food and drink are a highlight. TheFouerfëschis an absolute must. It is whiting cooked in a beer batter,generally served withchips, beer or a lesser dry wine from the Moselle.
If you are not a fan of fish or if you prefer to eat while you take a stroll, you will find other options to your liking: you can find any grilled food that is generally served at popular festivals in Luxembourg, as well as stalls offering foreign specialties.
The sheep procession
On the Sundaymorning of the funfair (Kiermessonndeg), musicians wearing the blue smocks of 19th-century peasants make their way through the streets of the city, blowing into their instruments as they follow a shepherd and a little flock of sheep with ribbons. . As money is collected, the same tune is played over and over again — theHämmelsmarsch, an old popular tune for which the Grand Duchy's poetMichel Lentzwrote lyrics.
And of course the shepherd, his sheep and the musicians all attend the ceremony when the mayor declares theFoueropen. The ceremony is followed by an inaugural tour of the fairground by the country’s politicians, both present and aspiring, as they mingle with the crowds. This concludes over a platter ofKiermesham(ham) andKiermeskuch(cake) served in one of theFouerstands.
Autumn is knocking at the door
"Oh mei, t'ass scho Fouer!" (oh dear, the Foueris already here) - this is a slightly melancholic expression that can often be heard in Luxembourg, when the first rides are set up on the Glacis. Indeed, the opening of theFoueris the harbinger of the end of both the summer and holidays, and during the fireworks that bring the event to a close, many onlookers already wear a jacket against the colder weather.
A tradition from the Middle Ages
What is now a funfair wasoriginally a market, but no-one really knows how it got its name: perhaps from the old name for the Plateau duSaint-Esprit, the Schadebourg, where it used to be held, or from the word Schober (literally: stack), since the fair was held on St Bartholomew's Day, at harvest-time. TheSchueberfouerwasfounded in 1340 by John I of Luxembourg (known as John the Blind), Count of Luxembourg and King of Bohemia. That is why the fair’s stallkeepers erected a monument in his honour in the nearby municipal park.
In bygone days, the market, where cattle and all sorts of objects were sold, used to last eight days. Nowadays, thefair normally lasts for 3 weeks around St Bartholomew's Day (23rd August). Over the years, the market has gradually turned into an entertaining funfair orKiermes, with the cathedral's patronal festival taking place during theFouerzäit.
(Source: Josy Braun in A propos ... des fêtes et traditions)
Last update06.08.2024
For more information
Léiffrawëschdag: a unique harvest festival in Greiveldange
Allerhellegen and Trauliicht: Honour the dead and drive away evil spirits
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/all-saints-and-trauliicht.html
Allerhellegen and Trauliicht: Honour the dead and drive away evil spirits
When the nights become significantly longer, leaves fall down and the last sunny days of autumn give way to winds and rain, All Saints' Day is just around the corner. On this occasion and faithful to tradition, we commemorate our deceased and cultivate a custom found mainly in the north of the country: theTrauliicht.
All Saints' Day and day of the Dead
Allerhellegen(eng.: All Saints' Day) is a public holiday in the Grand Duchy and is celebrated on 1 November in Christian countries. It is the feast of all Christian saints, including those that were not canonised or whose sanctity is only known to God.
On this occasion,families gather in cemeteries to commemorate their deceased close onesand lay down candles, flowers and wreaths for their sake and memory. This is of normal practice throughout the country and is accompanied by a religious ceremony and the blessing of the graves.
2 November isAllerséilen, theday of the Dead. It is dedicated to all the deceased who, according to Catholic doctrine, are in purgatory and have not yet been fully united with God.
SomeTrauliichterto drive malicious spirits away
In the north of Luxembourg, another tradition is currently experiencing a revival: theTrauliicht. On this occasion,villagers hollow out beetroot that are then decorated with horrible faces. Lit by a candle, theseTrauliichterare then placed on village walls and by windows of homes toprotect households from the souls of the dead and evil spirits, which are said to be particularly active on those days. In the past, people used theTrauliichterwhen driving the cows into the barn. They were hung on both sides of the stable doorto drive away spirits and diseaseswhen the cattle entered.
Trauliichtis traditionally observed most in the rocky hills of the Ardennes, in northern Luxembourg, where the festival was widespread until the 1970s. It then experienced a resurgence in the entire country with the rise in popularity of the Americanised version of Halloween in the 1990s.
While the two variants share the same roots,Trauliichthas remained a more traditional, less commercial festival than its transatlantic equivalent.
Have you carved your "Trauliicht"yet?
In collaboration with theRobbesscheiernature discovery centre, this video shows you how to make them!
Materials: pincers, string, wire, wooden sticks, knife, candle, saw, tan knife (or something similar), a nail or screwdriver (or another pointed object for making holes).
Sculpt a "Trauliicht" (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update20.11.2024
For more information
Kleeschen: unwrapping the delightful customs of St. Nicholas Day
Christmas - a time of togetherness
Dräikinneksdag: celebrating Epiphany with a cake
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/grand-duc-guillaume-assermentation-trounwiessel.html
As one reign begins, another comes to an end
Like a perpetual motion, Luxembourg is turning a page to write a new one, thus continuing the centuries-old tradition of its monarchy. After 25 years on the throne, Grand Duke Henri is handing over to his son, Prince Guillaume. The handover takes place in the Chamber of Deputies when Prince Guillaume takes the oath that marks the beginning of his reign: "I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, to maintain national independence and territorial integrity, as well as public and individual freedoms."
But before this oath, there was a prince, still young, who had been preparing for years to take on this responsibility.
Birth of the Crown Prince
On11 November 1981, at the Grande-Duchesse Charlotte Maternity Hospital, a long-awaited little nose appeared: that of Guillaume, the first child of the Grand Ducal couple Henri and Maria-Teresa. Soon the little prince would be surrounded by his brothers and sisters Félix, Louis, Alexandra and Sébastien.
The young Prince Guillaume attendedprimary school in Lorentzweilerbefore continuing hissecondary education at the Lycée Robert Schumanin Luxembourg City, then in Switzerland, where he obtained his French baccalaureate in 2001.
In keeping with family tradition, Guillaume enrolled at theRoyal Military Academy Sandhurstin Great Britain in 2001. Sworn in in 2002, he served in the Luxembourg army with the rank of colonel.
After studying international politics in the United Kingdom, he completed his studies in France, where he obtained adouble degree in literature and political sciencewith honours from the University of Angers in 2009.
A prince committed to the economy
Alongside his university studies, Prince Guillaume took courses to familiarise himself with the world of economics and politics.
This was essential training, as in his role as Hereditary Grand Duke, he is involved in Luxembourg's economic and social commitments. At the age of 19, he was already chairinghis first economic missions, notably in South Korea, Italy and the United States.
Since 2004, the Hereditary Grand Duke has been presenting theLuxembourg American Business Awardin New York ashonorary president of the Trade and Investment Board.
At the national level, he actively supports the Luxembourg economy by regularly accompanying initiatives to promote the country alongsideLuxembourg for Business, theChamber of Commerce,Luxembourg for FinanceandFedil. In addition, he has presided over theChamber of Trades' master craftsman's certificate ceremony since 2004.
A couple active in public life
However, the future Grand Duke cannot devote himself exclusively to the country's economic affairs. He also has to build hisfamily life. In April 2012, he announced hisengagement to Countess Stéphanie de Lannoy, whom he had met at an event in Germany. The wedding was celebrated at Notre-Dame Cathedral in Luxembourg City in October of that year. Today,the couple have two children: Prince Charles, born in May 2020, and Prince François, born in March 2023.
As the heir apparent couple, Prince Guillaume and Princess Stéphanie are involved innumerous official activitiesside by side. Their commitments often reflect a desire to promote causes that are close to their hearts. The promotion of Luxembourgish craftsmanship is one such example. Through the non-profit organisationDe Mains de Maîtres, they actively support Luxembourgish arts and crafts and craftsmanship.
The Grand Ducal couple actively participates in Luxembourg's cultural and sporting life. They are regularly seen at concerts, art fairs and artistic circles, or visiting exhibitions at various Luxembourg museums. They also attend the Olympic Games and the Games of the Small States of Europe as often as possible.
A Grand Duke sensitive to social issues
Interested in politics, economics, philosophy, history and reading, the Grand Duke also has a passion for music, both classical and modern, with a particular fondness for the guitar. In addition to sporting activities such as tennis, skiing, swimming and water sports, he also enjoys recharging his batteries in nature.
This balance between his leisure life and sense of duty is accompanied by a deep social commitment. This is why he takes a particularinterest in social businessand microfinance, which he considers to be essential levers in the fight against poverty.
Prince Guillaume is also very attached to theKräizbierg Foundation, whose concept of social and professional integration he particularly appreciates. After chairing its board of directors for more than 10 years (2000–2011), he became its honorary president in March 2011.
His social commitment is also expressed throughvarious patronages. He has been the High Patron of Special Olympics Luxembourg since 2017 and of the National Association for Road Accident Victims since 2002.
Also very involved in charitable work, Prince Guillaume has taken up the torch from his grandfather, Grand Duke Jean, by becomingHonorary Governor of Lions District 113 Luxembourg, a position his grandfather held for more than 50 years.
But his grandfather's legacy does not end there: from childhood, he also passed on his love of nature and adventure, introducing him to scouting, a passion that the Prince continues to this day by joining theBoard of Trustees of the World Scout Foundation.
Last update06.10.2025
For more information
As one reign draws to a close, another begins
The symbols of the dynasty
The Grand Duke
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/grand-duc-henri.html
As one reign draws to a close, another begins
"I swear to observe the Constitution and the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, to maintain national independence and territorial integrity as well as public and individual freedoms." It was with these words that the reign of Grand Duke Henri began on 7 October 2000. In accordance with the Constitution, he took the oath of office before the members of the Chamber of Deputies. This moment marks the beginning of a new chapter in the country's history.
It was also apivotal moment in the life of the young Prince Henri- Crown Prince or Grand Duke - depending on whether it was before or after 7 October 2000. Before 7 October, he was the heir to the throne and actively involved in trade missions as well as training for many years for his future role. After 7 October, he became Head of State and turned the page on the past. He was determined to govern in a modern and open way, whilst remaining faithful to traditions.
Life and reign of Grand Duke Henri in images
The grand ducal couple taking a walk in Cabasson in 2015
© Grand Ducal Court
Mariage du Grand-Duc héritier Henri avec Mademoiselle Maria Teresa Mestre le 14 février 1981
© Grand Ducal Court
The grand ducal family leaving the hospital in Luxembourg shortly after the birth of Prince Sebastian
© SIP
Childhood picture
© Grand Ducal Court
State visit to Luxembourg by the King and Queen of the Netherlands, from 23 to 25 May 2018
© Cour grand-ducale / Cyril Moreau, Bestimage
Institution du Grand-Duc héritier Henri comme Lieutenant-Représentant le 4 mars 1998
© Copyright non identifié
Prince Henri at the boy scouts
© Grand Ducal Court
Official audience of the Grand Ducal Family with the Pope, 21 March 2016
© Cour grand-ducale / Charles Caratini
Visite au Luxembourg de Kofi Annan, secrétaire général des Nations Unies, les 28 et 29 janvier 1999
© Grand Ducal Court
Grand Duke Henri meets the President of the United States, Barack Obama, and the Queen of Denmark, Marguertie II, during the celebrations for the 70th Allied anniversary in Normandy.
© SIP
Portrait picture of young Prince Henri
© Grand Ducal Court
The grand ducal family gets together in Cabasson in summer
© Grand Ducal Court
Ceremony to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second World War in Europe, Luxembourg, 8 May 2015
© SIP / Charles Caratini
Prince Sebastian graduating from the Franciscan University of Steubenville in 2015
© Grand Ducal Court
Grand Duke Henri's accession to the throne on October 7, 2000
© SIP
Childhood picture
© Grand Ducal Court
Le Grand-Duc héritier et Alex Bodry rendent visitent au contingent luxembourgeois à Sarajevo
© Grand Ducal Court
Portrait picture of Grand Duke Henri and Grand Duchess Maria Teresa
© Grand Ducal Court
Prince Henri at the boy scouts camp (first from right)
© Grand Ducal Court
Before 7 October 2000
Long before that solemn day in October 2000, Prince Henri wasborn on 16 April 1955at the Château de Betzdorf.As the eldest of five children of Grand Duke Jean and Grand Duchess Joséphine-Charlotte, he was destined for a unique role:to one day become the sovereign of Luxembourg.
However, there was still a long journey to undertake before his ascension to the throne. After completing hissecondary education in Luxembourg and France,he trained as a soldier at the prestigiousRoyal Military Academy in Sandhurst, England. He graduated with the rank of officer in 1975.
Prince Henri went on tostudy political science at the University of Geneva in Switzerland, where he obtained a degree in political science in 1980. His personal life also took on a new direction when he metMaria Teresa Mestrea Cuban national, whom he married in 1981. The couple had five children.
In 1984, Henri was appointed heir apparent to the Grand Duchy. Up until his accession to the throne, one of his roles was to strengthen Luxembourg's position on the world economic stage. Whether in Asia, America or the Middle East,Prince Henri forged links with foreign partnersin order to strengthen the Grand Duchy's image on the global arena. These trips paved the way for countless trade opportunities for Luxembourg companies and served to attract new investors to Luxembourg.
After 7 October 2000
In 2000, after 35 years of reign,Grand Duke Jean decided to abdicate at the age of 79.Prince Henri officially succeeded him to the throne on 7 October, the day of the swearing-in ceremony in the Chamber of Deputies.
As such, a new life began for Henri, a life full of responsibilities and duties, and at the same time a new chapter began in the history of the Grand Duchy.
From the very first days of their reign, the Grand Duke and Grand Duchess made a series ofcourtesy visits to France and Germany, highlighting the importance of Luxembourg's special ties with its neighbouring countries. Moreover,contact with the local populationwas also a priority in the daily lives of the Grand Duke and Grand Duchess.Maintaining close ties with the peopleremains of vital importance to the Grand Ducal couple. In practical terms, their commitment is displayed by their active involvement in everyday life, by attending concerts, exhibitions, academic conferences, sporting events as well as visits to hospitals and nursing homes.
During his speeches, whether on Christmas Eve or on National Day, the Head of State constantly reminds us of the values that distinguish the Luxembourg character:tolerance, respect, dignity and solidarity.
When he no longer has to attend to his official duties, the Grand Duke will turn his attention to his family, which has grown over the years. As well as the father of five children, he is now grandfather to eight grandchildren.
Today, 25 years after taking his oath before the Chamber of Deputies, Grand Duke Henri is turning the page andpreparing to pass on the crown to his son, Prince Guillaume.A new chapter in the Grand Duchy's history will be written when it is his turn to pronounce the following words: "I swear to uphold the Constitution and laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, to maintain national independence and territorial integrity as well as public and individual freedoms".
Last update03.10.2025
For more information
The Grand Duke
The symbols of the dynasty
National symbols
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/mediation.html
Mediation: navigating conflict and growing as a society
Mediation as a means to resolve conflicts without lengthy judicial procedures is becoming ever more popular, due to its money- and time-saving nature. Whether it's within the confines of a marriage, between business partners, in a neighbourhood or at school, the empowering nature of mediation is enormous and the reason why Luxembourg's mediation services have been thriving. Meet three key players on their mission: the Centre for Civil and Commercial Mediation, the School Mediation Service and an accredited neighbourhood mediator.
Mediation as integral part of Luxembourg's legal system
"In every legal dispute, there is a window of opportunity for mediation, when the parties involved realise how much energy, time and therefore money they are going to have to invest," says Jörg Batz of the Centre for Civil and Commercial Mediation (CMCC). The former manager retrained as a certified mediator and joined the CMCC. This not-for-profit association –  the costs are covered by the parties seeking mediation –mediates in a wide range of situations, from litigation between international companies, to disputes between neighbours. According to Batz, only 4 to 5 sessions suffice in the majority of cases – sometimes even a simple phone call serves to bring both parties together in a mutually beneficial agreement. Moreover, the longer lasting benefits are just as remarkable:both parties feel empoweredby the process and see their own interest in building a solution to their problem together and that solution is also legally binding. Thus,mediation is acting as a part of the legal system, not as its alternative.
Luxembourg's mediation services at a glance
Depending on your needs, these are the sectorial mediation services that can help you:
Empowering people as a Leitmotiv
Mediation not only prevents lengthy legal procedures but also plays a vital role inestablishing common ground for the benefit of all parties involved. This significance is particularly pronounced in the context of the nation's youth, where the integration of students from diverse national, cultural, and social backgrounds is viewed as essential for our society's future success. This is precisely where the School Mediation Service (SMS) steps in. The SMS focuses onpreventing students from dropping out, particularly in cases involving immigration backgrounds or specific needs. As an independent entity under the Ministry of Education, it can request documents and make recommendations with the goal of improving the education system in the long run. Thus, it represents a key element of a societal movement that engages individuals in decisions affecting them and guides them toward mutually advantageous resolutions.
This is also true forlocal communities, where mediation has become a successful tool to resolve disputes. Astrid Glod, a trained mediator and head of Me-Mo Mediation-Mobbing, is called upon by local administrations when neighbours cannot settle their differences. Indeed, the participating municipalities have come to appreciate this alternative method, as it helps unclog the commune’s services, but most of all it enables residents to assume control of their own conflicts. The effect is curative: local communities are encouraged to find common ground that enables both parties to emerge from the situation as winners. And even though not every dispute can fully be settled – around two thirds of the cases are resolved this way –,mediation is instrumental in creating communication channels that bridge differences of opinion and cultural differences and build consensus across cultural and other divides.
Last update07.11.2023
For more information
Justice system
La tripartite: le modèle social du Luxembourg
Citizen participation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/citizen-participation-luxembourg.html
Citizen participation in democratic life to strengthen community life
Playing an active role in democratic life is a key part of living together in community. Citizen participation can be an individual activity, when we exercise our right to vote or submit public petitions, or a collective process, when we get involved in civic associations. Nowadays it is becoming increasingly institutionalised, with institutions calling on citizens to participate in public decision-making. Citizenship education is therefore an essential tool in improving democracy.
What is citizen participation?
Citizen participation is aprocess of engagement whereby citizens, acting either on their own or collectively, aim to influence community life. Being a citizen goes far beyond a mere legal status involving rights and duties: people have the opportunity toplay an active part in democratic lifeas a means of improving the way in which welive together as members of a community.
Individual citizen participation
As individuals, citizens can take action by exercising theirright to vote and stand for election. In Luxembourg, anyone with Luxembourgish citizenship who enjoys civil and political rights, is aged 18 or over and lives in Luxembourg is eligible to vote or stand as a candidate in the country'slegislative elections. Non-Luxembourg nationals may vote or stand as a candidate inmunicipal electionsas long as they have been resident in Luxembourg for at least five years. Other elections also take place every five years:European elections, to elect Members of the European Parliament, andsocial elections, to elect staff representatives in companies.
Another way for citizens to be involved in political life on an individual basis is by submitting apublic petitionto the Parliament. The aim of this initiative is to launch a debate among elected representatives on the matter in question. Note that this is a forum not for defending individual interests – petitions of this nature are not accepted – but rather for raising acause in the general and national interest that serves all citizens.
The Committee on Petitions examines all petition requests. If it delivers a favourable opinion, the Conference of Presidents gives its agreement for the petition to be published on the website of the Parliament. Citizens then have 42 days to sign the petition online. If 5,500 signatures are collected, a public debate is launched that may lead to a legislative procedure.
Citizens can also submitordinary petitionsindividually: these raise issues on which ministers are required to provide a response.
Referendums, although less frequent, are also a means of individual citizen participation. This form of electoral consultation calls on the electorate to vote for or against a proposal that is put to them.
Collective citizen participation
The rights to peaceful assembly and association are the pillars of collective citizen participation, and they are guaranteed by the Constitution.
Freedom of associationin particular enables citizens to join civic action groups, whether at local level – neighbourhood associations, for example – or at national or transnational level – such as major non-governmental organisations. Thisnetwork of civic associationsforms what is known ascivil society– the glue that holds all democracies together.
Citizen participation – a two-way street
Citizen participation is often seen as a bottom-up initiative, from citizens to institutions. The many public and ordinary petitions and the wealth of civic associations reflect this reality. Butcitizen participation is also becoming increasingly rooted in an institutional framework. Institutions seek the participation of civil society in public decision-making as a means of promoting transparency and addressing the limitations of representative democracy.
'Public spaces are supposed to be for all to use. Therefore, everyone should have the opportunity to contribute to discussions on the development of these spaces,' affirms Luxembourg City Council in its introduction to the placemaking procedure.Luxembourg's capital city regularly calls for civic engagement when it comes to the development of public spaces: anyone with an interest – local residents, users, etc. – can submit ideas and make proposals. The City Council then draws up a draft plan and submits it as a basis for discussion in citizen participation meetings, with the aim of reaching agreement on a final plan.
Metzeschmelz is the name of the new neighbourhood on the border between Esch-sur-Alzette and Schifflange, on the former industrial site of the Arbed factory. Since 2023, the process oftransforming the area into a living, sustainable neighbourhoodhas been in full swing, thanks to close collaboration between citizens, planners and politicians. All residents of the surrounding municipalities are invited toplay an active part in this transformation.
Citizenship needs to be built
'Democracy needs democrats' – that is the message promoted by theZentrum fir politesch Bildung(ZpB – Centre for Political Education). The aim of this foundation is to promote citizenship by improving our understanding of democracy and the current challenges facing society. To this end, the ZpB runs training courses for teachers and the general public, puts on exhibitions and publishes resources which can be downloaded via its website.
Three questions for Michèle Schilt, Deputy Director of the ZpB
Citizenship education refers to all the processes that help people understand the workings and challenges of a democratic society. It takes place in schools, of course, but also in other contexts such as youth centres and childcare centres, civic associations, sports and music clubs, etc.Democracy is something that needs to be learned and practised. It is not an entirely 'natural' way of life. But we are convinced that democracy isthe best way of guaranteeing that we respect as many different opinions and views as possible, in a peaceful way.
Social media platforms are a highly effective tool for disseminating information and creating linksbetween people all around the globe. But theyalso come with dangers, such as the dissemination of fake news andtheories that are marginal or even dangerousfor minorities or for the very existence of democratic society. The ZpB providestwo online toolsto help counter these threats:www.propaganda.guidecan be used to identify propaganda, andwww.filterbubble.lushows the extent to which we are trapped in our own bubble and often fail to take into account the diversity of opinions around us. To 'build' a citizenship that is dynamic and constantly developing, we need to recognise the value of real human contact.Humans need direct, live contact.This is what the ZpB is trying to encourageby developing various networks of people in positions of influence, especially within participatory structures, such as the network of teachers who are using the methodLéieren duerch Engagement(Learning through engagement) or the tutors involved in supervising pupils' committees, for example.
In five years, the ZpB has grown considerably. Although our initial focus was on schools and on providing them withpublicationslikeduerchbléck! Politik verstoen(In a nutshell! Understanding politics), our work in the field of non-formal education and with adults has increased over time. One of our major projects, carried out with the University of Luxembourg, wassmartwielen, a platform for the legislative and European electionswhere users could compare their opinions with the positions of the candidates. Another project which began in March this year isDemokratieLabo, an interactive exhibitionin three languages for anyone from 12 to 99 years old. ​ The feedback has been positive and we are pleased to have created something that enables visitors to discuss both democratic principles, such as freedom, security and justice, and social challenges that are particularly topical in Luxembourg, such as housing, poverty and job insecurity, and inequality. We would love to see you there – head towww.demokratielabo.luto find out more!
Propaganda guide - Zentrum fir politesch Bildung (Video/Audio YouTube)
Citizen participation - Zentrum fir politesch Bildung (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update18.03.2025
For more information
The electoral system
Tripartite: Luxembourg's social model
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/national-anthem-2021.html
National anthem
The 'Heemecht' is Luxembourg's national anthem. It is more than a simple song: il symbolises the Grand Duchy, the identity of its people and its sense of belonging to a nation.
'Wou d'Uelzecht durech d'Wisen zéit, Duerch d'Fielsen d'Sauer brëcht.' These are the first words of our national anthem 'Ons Heemecht' (Our Homeland). Written in 1859 by the poetMichel Lentzand set to music byJean-Antoine Zinnen, it was first played publicly by four singers at a band competition in Ettelbruck in 1864.
Theofficial versionis only composed of the first and last stanza. The national anthem is played at most public state and sports events. It is more than a simple song. 'Ons Heemecht' has a political dimension, because it symbolises the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, as do the national coat of arms and the flag. The national anthem is unique and an integral part of this country.
When it is played during thecelebrations of the birthday of HRH the Grand Dukeon 23 June, 'Ons Heemecht' takes on a partciularly important role, as it conveys the people's profound sense of identity and belonging.
Asmusiciansbridge the divide between music and audience, we were curious to get to know their personal relationship to the national anthem, and asked them which line or words were their favourites, and why. Here are their answers.
Serge Tonnar, musician and composer
'Looss virublénken d’Fräiheetssonndéi mir sou laang gesin.'
'Let Freedom's sun in glory glowFor now and evermore.'
'In this line, it's most of all the 'freedom's sun' which charms me. Freedom is the subject of many Luxembourgish patricotic songs from the 19th century, and an ideal I  can still identify with today. Contrary to today's false patriots who seek a division of our society, this is about cohesion through a common bigger value. Freedom has to be fought for every day, even though today it faces other threats than during Michel Lentz' time.'
Claire Parsons, musician and composer
'Gesank, Gesank vu Bierg an Dall Der Äärd, déi äis gedron;'Léift huet en treie Widderhall A jidder Broschts gedon'
'Sing, sing, on high berg and wide dale,the earth who bore our births.Our love with faithful echo still,Our hearts beat with mirth.'
'… extremely beautiful, because I am a musician and also because the sentence reflects what songs in a society are all about. Singing is there to give us hope, in good moments as in difficult ones. It doesn't matter whether the song originates from nature or people who are fundamentally in tune with it, we listen and harmonise.'
Daniel Balthasar, musician and composer
'De fräie Geescht' and 'Looss virublénken d’Fräiheetssonn'
'Your spirit of liberty bestow''Let Freedom's sun in glory glow'
'I am not a particularly patriotic or religious person. Nonetheless, for me the lines 'De fräie Geescht' and 'Looss viru blénken d'Fräiheetssonn' hold a deeper meaning which I connect with. The fact that I have been born into a country and age where everybody can freely express their ideas without fearing for their lives is something that I do not consider to be self-evident. Our national anthem is a reminder of that.'
Sascha Ley, singer, composer, producer
'Wou d’Uelzecht duerech d’Wisen zéit,Duerch d’Fielsen d’Sauer brécht.Wou d’Rief laanscht d’Musel dofteg bléit,Den Himmel Wäin ons mécht.'
"Where the Alzette slowly flows,The Sura plays wild pranks,Where fragrant vineyards amply growOn the Mosella's banks;"
"I don't know any hymns by heart, and instead of thinking of 'my' homeland I see myself travelling the whole world. The world would be my ideal homeland. I love our beautiful multicultural country, but as a potential nomad my thoughts hardly reach the subject of nationalism. Therefore, the description of nature in this verse is dear to me, contemplative and totally harmless."
David Ianni, pianist and composer
'O Du do uewen, dem seng Hand…'
'O Thou above whose powerful hand'
'The older I get, the less I know how to say whose 'hand' is there 'above'. What is that infinite and inscrutable force? Nonetheless, I have been accompanied my whole life by the profound certainty that this hand carries me, protects me, catches me and lifts me up, again and again. I sense that the infinite love which 'makes states or lays them low' ('duerch d'Welt d'Natioune leet') flows through us all if we open our eyes (from the bottom of our hearts). Through our thankfulness for a geographical home comes a sense of belonging to ALL of life: We are ALL brothers and sisters on this small planet.'
"Ons Heemecht", national anthem, performed by the Luxembourg Military Band, conducted by Lt.Col. Jean-Claude Braun. (Mpeg, 1,84 Mo)
Ons Heemecht (original)
Wou d’Uelzecht duerech d’Wisen zéit,Duerch d’Fielsen d’Sauer brécht.Wou d’Rief laanscht d’Musel dofteg bléit,Den Himmel Wäin ons mécht.Dat ass onst Land, fir dat mir géifHeinidden alles wo’n.Onst Heemechtsland, dat mir sou déifAn onsen Hierzer dro’n.
O, Du do uewen, deem seng HandDuerch d’Welt d’Natioune leet.Behitt Du d’Lëtzebuerger LandVru friemem Joch a Leed!Du hues ons all als Kanner schonnde fräie Geescht jo ginn.Looss virublénken d’Fräiheetssonn,déi mir sou laang gesinn.
Our Homeland (translation)
Where the Alzette slowly flows,The Sura plays wild pranks,Where fragrant vineyards amply growOn the Mosella's banks;There lies the land for which we wouldDare everything down here,Our own, our native land which ranksDeeply in our hearts!
O Thou above whose powerful handMakes States or lays them low,Protect this Luxembourger landFrom foreign yoke and woe.Your spirit of liberty bestowOn us now as of yore.Let Freedom's sun in glory glowFor now and evermore.
(Translation: Nicholas E. Weydert / 1929)
Last update03.10.2025
The symbols of the dynasty
National symbols
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/tripartite.html
Tripartite: Luxembourg's social model
Luxembourg's so-called 'tripartite' social model is based on an institutionalised and continuous trialogue between the government, employers and trade unions on important economic and social issues with a view to finding a consensus.
History
The 'Luxembourg model' was implemented inthe 1970s, following the severe steel crisis that threatened to deeply shake foundations of Luxembourg society.
The Law of 26 July 1975 authorised the government to implement measures intended to prevent redundancies due to a slowdown in the economic cycle and ensure the maintenance of jobs. At the same time it created theEconomic Committee in its 'Tripartite' composition, responsible, among others, for closely monitoring the evolution of the economic situation and making a report to the government once a month.
In 1977, due to the worsening problems in the steel sector, the government brought together a 'Tripartite Steel Conference', which developed an action plan for continued economic growth and full employment.
The Law of 24 December 24 institutionalised a 'Tripartite Coordination Committee' tobe convened in case of a declining economic and social situation. The function of this committee is to build consensus on important socio-economic issues. A little more than a year later, in March 1979, the Tripartite Coordination Committee reached a first agreement on the restructuring and modernization of the steel industry. This first tripartite agreement manages to avoid the dismissal of several thousand steel workers - an undeniable success.
As a result of the Luxembourg Government's strong push for economic diversification,sectoral tripartiteshave been set up. Thus, the search for consensual solutions has entered in the customs.
And these days?
Nowadays, five institutions guarantee a permanent social dialogue: the Economic Committee, the Economic and Social Council, the Tripartite Coordination Committee, the Permanent Committee on Labour and Employment and the Tripartite Steel Conference.
Economic Committee
Created in 1975, the Economic Committee's main mission is to ensure the maintenance of employment and to prevent unemployment due to cyclical causes. The Committee meets monthly and is made up of representatives of employee and employer organisations, as well as various ministries and administrations.
The Economic and Social Council
TheEconomic and Social Council( Conseil économique et social, CES) is composed of employer, employee and government representatives. This consultative body organises support for national social dialogue and studies economic, social and financial problems affecting several economic sectors or the national economy as a whole. It advises on any legislative or regulatory measures and, in the first quarter of each year, prepares a report on the economic, social and financial development of the country.
Tripartite Coordination Committee
Since 1977, the Tripartite Coordinating Committee has brought together representatives of government, employers and labour. Its function is to reach consensus on important economic and social issues.
Tripartite Steel Conference
The Tripartite Steel Conference is a direct consequence of the crisis in the steel sector, the mainstay of the Luxembourg economy until the late 1980s. It is only relevant to the steel industry. Among other things, the negotiations at this conference have made it possible to avoid major redundancy problems.
Permanent Committee on Labour and Employment
The Permanent Committee on Labour and Employment, created by thelaw of 21 December 2007, is composed of representatives of trade unions, companies and the government. It meets whenever necessary but at least three times a year to examine the situation regarding employment and unemployment, working conditions and the safety and health of workers.
Last update25.01.2024
Luxembourg's workforce
Social security
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/chamber-deputies.html
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies has 60 members who represent the country's population in the legislative process. As part of a transparent and participatory framework, they ensure that the laws uphold the will of the people. Moreover, they offer citizens direct access to political decision-makers through public petitions.
Structure and composition
The Chamber of Deputies is made up of60 deputies elected by direct universal suffrage for a five-year term, through a system of proportional representation. For thelegislative elections, the country is divided intofour electoral constituencies(North - Centre - East - South), each of which is represented by a fixed number of deputies.
Several parties are currently representedand contribute to Luxembourg's political dynamism:
Generally speaking,the deputies are divided into two main groupsin the Chamber:"the majority"which brings together deputies who are members of the parties that form the government, and"the opposition", which includes all other deputies.
The plenary sessions of the Chamber are chaired by a president, often referred to as the "first citizen of the country". The president also heads the Conference of Presidents, which is responsible for organising the work of the Chamber, and represents the Chamber at national and international events. The president is supported by vice-presidents and an administrative team.
The Chamber convenes in the capital at the "Krautmaart" (Marché aux herbes) and its meetings are generally public.
A transparent legislative process
The legislative procedurebegins with the introduction of bills by members of the government or deputies. The texts are then referred to one or more parliamentary committees and a rapporteur is appointed. The texts are also passed on toprofessional chambers and the Council of State for their evaluation and opinion. At the end of this process, the rapporteur draws up a summary and submits it for debate at a public session.
During these debates,all deputies and members of the government can express their views on the text. However, the text can still be amended during the public session if requested by at least five deputies.
Finally,the text is subject to a vote during a plenary session. The Constitution stipulates that a second vote must take place no earlier than three months after the first vote; however, the Chamber commonly asks the Council of State to dispense with this vote. This dispensation is generally granted if there are no formal objections to the text.
This process ensures acareful examination of the legislative proposals and guarantees that the interests of all citizens are carefully taken into account.The general public can stay informed at all timesthrough online broadcast of debates and parliamentary committee meetings, as well as the publication of the decisions. The transparency of the democratic process is a fundamental principle of the Chamber of Deputies. It is crucial in order to prevent corruption and strengthen public confidence in political institutions.
Public petitions
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputiesactively encourages participatory democracy through public petitions. These petitions allow residents to raise their concerns and submit their ideas. Once received,the petitions can be signed by the general public. For a petition to be accepted,5,500 valid signatures must be collected within six weeks. The petition will then be discussed in a public debate and broadcast live. The members of parliament and members of the government other than the petitioner(s) may take part in the debate.
This initiative cultivates citizen participation, encourages open dialogue between residents and political stakeholders, and ensures that the public’s opinion is taken into account in the legislative process.
Last update02.07.2025
For more information
The electoral system
The Government of Luxembourg
Justice
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/justice.html
Justice
The Constitution and special acts of legislation lay down the foundations necessary to keep the judges free from all influence from the executive and legislative powers, but also to grant their independence from the citizens. Pursuant to the separation of powers, they are independent in the exercise of their functions.
Luxembourg has aConstitutional Court, deciding as to the conformity of the laws with the Constitution and two jurisdictions:
Constitutional Court
The Constitutional Court has its seat in Luxembourg and, as its name implies,rules on the constitutionality of laws. It is composed of nine members and comprises a single chamber composed of five judges.
It is not possible for the citizens to directly lodge an appeal with the Constitutional Court. If a party questions the constitutionality of a law before a judicial or administrative jurisdiction, the matter must be referred to the Constitutional Court if the issue of constitutionality is deemed vital to the solution of a dispute.
The Constitutional Courtdecides by way of judgements which are published in theMémorial, the Official Journal of the Grand Duchy ofLuxembourg, within 30 days of their delivery.
Courts of law
The courts of law include the three magistrate's courts, the two district courts and the Supreme Court of Justice.
The magistrate's courts
Magistrate's courts represent thefirstlevel of the hierarchy of courts. The three magistrate's courts in the Grand Duchy sit in Luxembourg City, Esch-sur-Alzette and Diekirch.
Magistrate's courts deal with cases oflesser importance in civiland commercial matters, provided the object of dispute may not exceed the sum of 10,000 euros in case of an appeal. They mostly play the role of conciliators and above all try to come to an amicable solution. Interms oflaw enforcement, the magistrate's courts operateas police courts.
The district courts
The country is dividedinto twojudicial districts, i.e. Luxembourg City and Diekirch. There is a district court for each of them.
These courts havejurisdiction in all civiland commercial matters that the law does not expressly assign to another jurisdiction. In criminal cases, the district courts act as a correctional chamber oras a criminalchamber, depending on the gravity of the criminal offence.
The Supreme Court of Justice
The Supreme Court of Justice has its seat in Luxembourg and consists of:
The general assembly of the Supreme Court of Justice meets to hearcharges admitted by the Parliament(Chambre des députés)against members of the government.
Administrative jurisdictions
Created following the constitutional reform of 12 July 1996, the administrative jurisdictions are composed of the Administrative Court and the Administrative Tribunal. They are competent for disputes concerning administrative decisions.
TheAdministrative Tribunalissues afirst instance rulingin cases of objections lodged on grounds of incompetence, abuse and misuse of power, violation of the law or of procedures protecting private interests, against any administrative decisions where no other recourse is admissible under the laws and regulations.
Supremeadministrative jurisdictionlies with the Administrative Court .It is an appeal body, which primarily hears cases brought against the decisions of other administrative courts and arbitrates disputes between the government and the Court of Auditors.
Last update05.12.2019
For more information
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
The Government of Luxembourg
The Grand Duke
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/symbols-dynasty.html
The symbols of the dynasty
The symbols of the national dynasty are:
The coat of arms
UponGrand Duke Henri's accession to the throne, the new sovereign established his small, medium and great coat of arms, which replaced those used since 1898. The new coat of arms is confined to the essential elements, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and the Nassau family. Reproducing the details of the national coat of arms of the Grand Duchy, the new coat of arms of Grand Duke Henri reflects the views of a modern Head of State aware of present political realities.
The anthem
TheWilhelmus (Mpeg, 1.06 Mb)is the anthem of the grand-ducal house. It is performed when one of the members of the grand-ducal family arrives at or leaves a ceremony. The anthem is inspired by a trumpet call or a cavalry fanfare
The first Luxembourgish text of theWilhelmuswas published byWilly Goergenin 1915 to commemorate thecentenaryof the Congress of Vienna.
The Luxembourgish writerNik Welterfound the inspiration to create the anthem for the House of Luxembourg-Nassau-Bourbon on the occasion of the wedding of Grand Duchess Charlotte and Prince Félix in 1919. He subsequently removed the first verse, which was marked too strongly by the events of the period.
The national holiday
TheNational Day (Nationalfeierdag) is an opportunity to experience Luxembourg's traditionswhile participating in activities organised for all audiences.23 June is celebrated as a national holiday every year, but the festivities start the evening before, on 22 June, with a solemn changing of the guard in front of the grand-ducal palace at around 4 pm.
From a historical point of view, the Grand Duchy has been independent, with a dynasty of its own, for only a relatively short period of time. During the 19th century, the Luxembourg people celebrated theirnational dayonKinneksdag(namely the birthday of the King of the Netherlands).
The country’s first real national day in a patriotic sense was theGroussherzoginsgebuertsdag, the birthday of Grand Duchess Charlotte . Given that the anniversary fell on 23 January, it was transferred in 1962 to a more summery date — 23 June.Ever since Grand Duke Jean ascended the throne in  1964, 23 June has continued to be celebrated as the country’s National Day.
Last update11.06.2020
For more information
National symbols
The Grand Duke
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/conseil-etat.html
The Council of State
The Council of State was instituted at the time of the constitutional revision of 27 November 1856. It is an independent institution that is called on for its opinion on all bills and proposals for new legislation and government draft regulations.
The Council of State - a consultative body
The Council of State acts as aconsultative organ in the legislative procedure. All bills submitted by either the Government or Chamber of Deputies (Parliament) require the opinion of the Council of State. The Council of State also gives its opinion on all government draft regulations.
It considers whether thedraft texts comply with the Constitution, international conventions, and the rule of law.  This is a preliminary check. The a posteriori review  is carried out by the Constitutional Court. The Council of State's role in the legislative procedure is to persuade, not to impose.
The main missions of the Council of State
According toordinary legislative procedure, before a government bill is presented to the Chamber of Deputies, theGovernment must ask the Council of State for its opinion. The Council of State also gives its opinion on all the amendments proposed in the course of the procedure.
InLuxembourg's single-chamber system, all government bills and parliament bills must undergo two successive votes by the Chamber of Deputies.  To attenuate the disadvantages of the Grand Duchy's system, the Council of State has a suspensive right of veto. There must be an interval of at least three months between the first and the second vote in the Chamber.
The Chamber may, however, waive the second vote, but only with the agreement of the Council of State. The main reason for the Council of State refusing to waive the second vote in the Chamber is if it feels that the legislation in question does not comply with either the Constitution, international law, European Union law, or with the general principles of law.
Composition and appointment
TheCouncil of State has 21 councillors. At least eleven of these councillors must hold a master's degree in law.Members of the Council of Stateare formally appointed and dismissed by the Grand Duke followingproposals made by the Government, the Chamber of Deputies, or the Council of State itself. When a candidate is appointed, both the distribution of the political parties in the Chamber of Deputies and a balanced representation of women and men is taken into account. The term of office of a member of the Council of State is 12 years.
Last update10.01.2020
For more information
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
The Government of Luxembourg
The Grand Duke
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/national-symbols.html
National symbols
The symbols which have been adopted by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg are of the utmost importance and  value, for they represent and symbolise the identity of a people, their sovereignty, and above all their desire to ' live together'.
The following symbols are noteworthy as regards the Luxembourg State:
The coat of arms, the Luxembourg flag and the national anthem are all protectedby Law.
Coat of arms
The coat of arms of Luxembourg, modified many times, was devised in the years between 1235 and 1239 by Henri V, count of Luxembourg.
The now official version contains thefollowing essential elements: barruly of argent and azure in ten parts and a lion rampant gules, crowned, armed and langued in gold with a forked tail crossed in saltire
There arethree grades of the Grand Duchy'scoat of arms: the small, the medium and the great coat of arms.
Luxembourg flag
The first known flag was carried by Count William of Luxembourg in 1123. It was barred, i.e. horizontally striped, probably yellow and red.
The current Luxembourg flag is made u ofthree horizontal bands ofred white and sky blue
In order to tell the Luxembourg and Dutch flags apart, a pragmatic solution was adopted: the Dutch blue is ultramarine and the Grand Duchy's blue is sky blue (Pantone colour code 299C).
National anthem
TheNational Anthem (Mpeg, 1.84 Mb)consists of thefirst and last verses of the songOns Heemecht('Our Homeland') dating from 1859, with words by the poetMichelLentzset to music byJean-Antoine Zinnen.
The national anthem, which was given its first public performance at a grand ceremony in Ettelbruck in 1864, issues a vibrant appeal for peace and freedom.
It expresses the country’sgreat joy at having achieved independence in 1839in an atmosphere of peace and prosperity.
Our Homeland (translation)
Where the Alzette slowly flows,The Sura plays wild pranks,Where fragrant vineyards amply growOn the Mosella's banks;There lies the land for which we wouldDare everything down here,Our own, our native land which ranksDeeply in our hearts!
O Thou above whose powerful handMakes States or lays them low,Protect this Luxembourger landFrom foreign yoke and woe.Your spirit of liberty bestowOn us now as of yore.Let Freedom's sun in glory glowFor now and evermore.
(Translation: Nicholas E. Weydert / 1929)
Ons Heemecht (original)
Wou d'Uelzecht durech d'Wisen zéit,Duerch d'Fielsen d'Sauer brëcht.Wou d'Rief laanscht d'Musel dofteg bléit,Den Himmel Wäin ons mëcht.Dat as onst Land, fir dat mir géif,Heinidden alles won.Ons Heemechtsland, dat mir sou déifAn onsen Hierzer dron.
O Du do uewen, deem séng HandDuurch d'Welt d'Natioune leet.Behitt Du d'Lëtzebuerger LandVru friemem Joch a Leed!Du hues ons all als Kanner schonde fräie Geescht jo gin.Looss viru blénken d'Fräiheetssonndéi mir sou laang gesin.
Last update26.01.2023
For more information
The symbols of the dynasty
Celebrate National Day: Join the Festivities for the Grand Duke's Birthday in Luxembourg!
History
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/electoral-system.html
The electoral system
According to its constitution, Luxembourg is a parliamentary democracy in the form of a constitutional monarchy.  At the national level, members of the Chamber of Deputies are elected every five years using the system of proportional representation.  The vote is secret, and voting is compulsory for everyone on the electoral roll. At the municipal level, elections are organised every six years. Voting in these elections is also compulsory. Foreign citizens can participate as voters (active voting right) or candidates (passive voting right) under certain conditions.
Luxembourg is ademocratic state, in which political officeholders are legitimised throughfree, general and secret ballot elections. This takes place through the elections of the Chamber of Deputies (Chambre des députés), municipal elections and European elections. In addition, national referendums can be held to consult the country's population on certain issues. Universal suffrage was first introduced to Luxembourg in 1919.
Parliamentary elections
Parliamentary electionsare heldevery five years. The current composition of the Chamber of Deputies was elected on 8 October 2023. The next parliamentary elections are due to take place inOctober 2028. The people of Luxembourg elect the60 membersof theChamber of Deputiesby universal suffrage, in accordance with the rules on proportional representation.
For parliamentary elections, the country is divided intofour electoral constituencies, with a different number of deputies to be elected in each one:
After the official results have been announced, the Grand Duke typically invites the winner of the electionto form a government, which is then presented and sworn in by the Grand Duke.
Who can participate in the elections?
To beeligible to vote, you must:
In addition, those wishing tostand as candidates must reside in Luxembourg and have joined a list. A candidate can form a list together with other candidates, or they can run independently with their own list.
Citizen participation (Video/Audio YouTube)
Municipal elections
In Luxembourg, municipal councilsare elected directly by the inhabitants of each municipalityevery six years. They consist of a mayor, two or more aldermen and several councillors. The exact number of aldermen and councillors depends on the number of inhabitants.
There aretwo different electoral proceduresin Luxembourg:
The next municipal elections will take place in2029.
Who can vote?
Persons can participatein their local municipal elections if they:
Foreign nationals can alsoparticipate in the elections under certain conditions.
Both Luxembourgish and non-Luxembourgish citizens can stand for electionin their local municipality, but specificproceduresmust be followed in both cases.
In municipal elections,voting is also compulsoryfor everyone on the electoral roll.
Parliamentary elections, how do they work? (Video/Audio YouTube)
Electoral constituencies and municipalities in Luxembourg
European elections
Every five years, Luxembourgers elect, by direct universal suffrage,six representatives of Luxembourgto the European Parliament. For European elections, Luxembourg constitutes a single electoral constituency. The lastEuropean electionswere held on 26 June 2019, and the next ones will take place in 2024.
More information about the procedures can be found on Guichet.lu, Luxembourg’s online administrative portal.
National referendums
A referendum is a direct democratic tool that involves all registered voters being called upon to vote for or against a proposal presented to them. For referendum purposes, the country forms a single electoral constituency. Voting at the referendum is compulsory for all voters registered on the electoral roll for parliamentary elections.
The last nationalreferendumwas held on 7 June 2015.
More information about the procedures can be found on Guichet.lu, Luxembourg’s online administrative portal.
Last update23.08.2024
For more information
News
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
The Government of Luxembourg
National symbols
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/grand-duke.html
The Grand Duke
Currently, Luxembourg is the only Grand Duchy in the world and the Grand Duke is its head of state.  He embodies the independence and continuity of a state that was strongly influenced by the ups and downs of history.
Representative democracy and constitutional monarchy
The state of Luxembourg is a representativedemocracy in the form of a constitutional monarchy,and thesovereign power resides in the nation. The Grand Duke exercises the sovereign power, in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the country. He has only those powers that the  Constitution and laws expressly  confer upon him.
Since 3 October 2025, Grand Duke Guillaume has been the "Head of State, thesymbol of its unity and guarantor of national independence"(Article 33 of the Constitution). As such, he has a unique legal status  and a  set of prerogatives is attached to his function Powers are conferred upon him by  dynastic succession.
The Grand Duke's prerogatives
The   Constitution of the Grand Duchy grants the Grand Duke considerable prerogatives. Yet in reality, the manner in which the Grand Duke exercises his sovereignty is more pragmatic than the Constitution would seem to indicate.
The Grand Duke participates in legislative power and exercises executive power.Thus, the constitution states that the Grand Dukeenacts the laws. Enactment is the act by which the Grand Duke attests to the content of the law and orders its publication and execution.
On an international level, the GrandDuke ratifies treatiesand ensures that the interests of the state and the Luxembourgish citizens are protected.
The Grand Duke'sregulatory powerconsists in taking the regulations and decrees necessary for the execution of the laws. He may delegate this power to the members of his government.
In theory, the Grand Duke decides upon theorganisation of his government, choosing his ministers. However, in practice, the Grand Duke chooses, on basis of theelection resultsa  Prime Minister who presents members of the government to the Grand Duke. They are generally leading figures in the political groups represented in Parliament.
Justice is dispensed in the name of the Grand Dukeby thecourts and tribunals. The judgements are executed in his name (article 49). But he does not, however, have any means of interfering in the exercise of judicial power.
The Order of Succession to the Throne
The crown of the Grand Duchy ishereditary in the Nassau familyin accordance with thefamily pact of 30 June 1783.
Before 2011, the family pact stipulated thatthe crown is handed down in a direct line by order of male primogeniture, to the exclusion of female descendants.In June 2011, gender equality in the line of succession was introduced by modification of the family pact.
​
Last update02.10.2025
For more information
The symbols of the dynasty
The Government of Luxembourg
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system/government.html
The Government of Luxembourg
According to the constitution, the Grand Duke holds the executive power and assures the execution of the laws by taking the necessary regulations. In practice, however, this task is performed by the government, which consists of a Prime minister and several members having the title of minister, minister delegate or secretary of State. The government resulting from the 2023 general elections is chaired by Luc Frieden.
The formation of the government
The text of the Constitution gives the Grand Duke the absolute freedom tochose the members of his government. Nevertheless, the democratic principle requires that the ministers not only have his confidence, but also that of the parliament's majority, being a minimum of 31 out of 60 deputies.
Therefore, the Grand Duke respects the results of the legislative elections by designating a Prime minister, who takes care to compose a government and a government program which will meet the accession of the parliamentary majority.
Duties and functioning of the Government
As abody of the executive power, the government possesses overall power to manage public affairs and is in charge of upholding the laws, regulations, decrees and public order. Every member of the government is head of one or several ministerial departments to which he/she assumes leadership.
In addition to its executive duties, the government also has the right of initiative in legislativeaffairs, called "government initiative", which allows it to presentdraft legislations toparliament (Chambre des députés). ​
The members of the government meet on a weekly basis in theGovernment Councilin order to deliberate on all the items on the agenda. All matters submitted to the Grand Duke must be deliberated beforehand at the Government Council. The GovernmentCouncil also discusses bills that are tabledin theChamber of Deputies.
Furthermore, the government manages thestate's income and expenditure budget, which is voted annually.
The Frieden-Bettel Government
The government resulting from the legislative elections of 8 October 2023 is a coalition government between the Christian Social Party (CSV) and the Democratic Party (DP), under the presidency of Luc Frieden (CSV).
The government was sworn in on 17 November 2023. It comprises:
On 22 November, the government programme waspresented to the Chamber of Deputies. This programme sets the broad political lines that the government will follow in the current legislative period.
The nextlegislative electionsare going to take place in 2028.
The formation of the government, how does it work? (Video/Audio YouTube)
The formation of the government, how does it work?
The government, how does it work? (Video/Audio YouTube)
The government, how does it work?
Last update14.05.2024
For more information
The electoral system
The Luxembourg Chamber of Deputies: promoting democratic governance
The Grand Duke
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/schengen-40-ans-histoire-europe-bateau-.html
Schengen: 40 years of European history on a ship
The date of 14 June 1985 was a milestone for the European Union, and especially for Luxembourg. On that day, the Schengen Agreement was signed on theMS Prinzessin Marie-Astrid, moored on the Moselle in the small Luxembourgish village of Schengen. To mark the 40th anniversary of the signing of the agreement, the Schengen Museum will be reopening, and the fully renovated vessel, renamed thePrinzessin Marie-Astrid Europa, will be unveiled as a central part of the new immersive museum experience. Come along to Schengen on 14 June 2025 for a historic day!
Prinzessin Marie-Astrid Europa: a new existence for an iconic boat
Moored in Schengen on 14 June 1985, the MS Princesse Marie-Astridplaced the Luxembourgish village on the global map. The agreement providing for free movement and the elimination of borders in Europe was signed on board this vessel.
In 1992, the vessel was sold to Germany and began sailing under the name MSRegensburgas a tour boat on the Danube. It was acquired by the municipality of Schengen in 2021, in collaboration with the Luxembourg government. The idea was to refurbish the boat and make it the centrepiece of a new immersive exhibition at theSchengen Museum.
The vessel, renamed thePrinzessin Marie-Astrid Europa, will house an interactive installation telling the story of the signing of the agreements. The "Signature Room" will transport visitors back in time, in the very surroundings where the representatives of the first signatory countries to the agreement gathered in 1985.
ThePrinzessin Marie-Astrid Europais set to return to Schengen for its official inauguration on 14 June 2025, as the festivities organised for the 40th anniversary of the Schengen Agreement are held. It will be kept riverworthy and moored in Schengen, and can be taken to different European countries for special events.
While the boat was being restored,theSchengen Museumwas also given a full overhaul, and it will reopen in time for the anniversary festivities.
Refurbishment of the Schengen Museum (Video/Audio YouTube)
Launch of the renovatedPrinzessin Marie-Astrid Europa(Video/Audio YouTube)
"Today more than ever, remembrance tourism has a particular relevance and a key role to play in reflecting on Europe's past and future. Our country has always passionately supported the European Union, and through its multiculturalism it embodies the EU's fundamental values." Lex Delles, Minister of the Economy, SMEs, Energy and Tourism.
The Schengen Agreement: a story of European cooperation, unity and openness
Schengen: an agreement, an area, a spirit
Belgium, Germany, France, Luxembourg and the Netherlands signed the Schengen Agreement on 14 June 1985.In doing so, these countries agreed to gradually remove controls at their internal borders and introduce freedom of movement for both their nationals and nationals of other EU Member States and some non-EU countries.
On 19 June 1990, the same countries signed the Schengen Convention, which supplements the agreement and lays down the arrangements and safeguards for establishing an area without internal border controls. The convention came into force in 1995.
The agreement and the convention together form the Schengen acquis, which was integrated into the EU framework in 1999, becoming EU legislation.
Today theSchengen areaenables EU residents to cross the internal borders of Member States without border controls or the need for a passport. In total, 27 European countries – 23 of the 27 EU Member States and the four members of the European Free Trade Association (Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland) – are part of the Schengen area.
For Martina Kneip, "open borders create open minds", and this is the "spirit of Schengen", which can be felt strongly in this small Luxembourgish village on the Moselle. Schengen is located at the triple border of Luxembourg, France and Germany, but the national borders are barely noticeable for the region's inhabitants, who cross them on a daily basis. When the Director of the Schengen European Centre speaks about her region, she clearly does not see it in terms of national borders. "The Schengen Agreements have a deep symbolic value for our country," she explains. "As a result of these agreements, Luxembourg became known as the country where the principles of the European Union were experienced in full."
A brief history: Luxembourg's role in the European integration process
Luxembourg's recent history and the history of the European Union in its current form are closely intertwined. It was surely no coincidence that the historic initiative of uniting Europeans after the Second World War came from French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman, who was born in Luxembourg to a French father and a Luxembourgish mother. When Schuman launched his plan for the establishment of aEuropean Coal and Steel Community(ECSC) in1950, Luxembourg was directly involved.
The ECSC was the first step in the European integration process, which was consolidated a few years later. In1957, alongside France, Germany, Italy, Belgium and the Netherlands, Luxembourg was a signatory of theRome Treaties, which founded theEuropean Economic Community(EEC) andregulated the use of nuclear energy(Euratom).
Over the following decades, with new Member States joining and the signing of new treaties, the EEC evolved into the European Union we know today. Among the many agreements that drove these developments, theSchengen Agreementsare closely associated with Luxembourg – not only because the country was one of the six original signatories behind the initiative, but also because the agreements were signed in the Luxembourgish village of Schengen, placing the country on the map for millions of citizens.
Last update02.06.2025
For more information
Ouverture internationale
Histoire
Moselle: la région viticole au coeur européen
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/luxembourg-unesco.html
Luxembourg and UNESCO: a commitment to education, science, culture and communication
As the world becomes more interconnected, UNESCO's global efforts in education, science, culture, and communication are increasingly vital. Luxembourg remains dedicated to implementing these principles both domestically and through international development partnerships.
Education: Empowering Future Generations
Today's children and adolescents will shape tomorrow's societies. To prepare them, they need access toinclusive, high-quality education that fosters civic engagement and sustainability awareness. In Luxembourg, this vision is realized through16UNESCO-affiliated schoolsand various nationwide initiatives.
Luxembourg also prioritises education in itsinternational development programmes, reinforcing its commitment to global progress.
Natural and Human Sciences: Addressing Global Challenges
Scientific innovation is essential toachieving the17 Sustainable Development Goals. Luxembourg fosters this progress through a network of research institutes and policies that welcome both local and international researchers. Additionally,the country supports underrepresented groups, including women, the LGBTIQ+ community, and vulnerable populations, ensuringdiverse voices contribute to scientific advancements. This inclusive approach strengthens efforts to combat misinformation and tackle crises like climate change.
Culture: Preserving Heritage and Celebrating Diversity
Luxembourg stands at the crossroads of multiple cultural influences that enrich the country's cultural landscape and foster its social cohesion. With UNESCO's support,Luxembourg preserves itstangible and intangible heritagewhile embracing diversity, multilingualism and cultural openness. The nation exemplifies intercultural exchange, where shared ideas and experiences foster mutual growth.
Information and Communication: Facilitating Global Dialogue
In a multicultural society, freedom of expression is crucial for respectful dialogue and democracy.Luxembourg champions a safe environment for diverse voices, supporting multilingual media and associations that empower minority communities. The country actively backs UNESCO'sInternational Programme for the Development of Communication(IPDC), particularly in promoting journalist safety and combating disinformation.
Découvrez notre patrimoine en images
Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall
With its grandiose landscapes, spectacular rock formations, deep valleys and rolling hills, this nature park is one of the most remarkable in Europe. It brings together local players and sustainable initiatives in the fields of agriculture, culture, tourism and environmental education. Since 2022, it has been part of the prestigious UNESCO Global Network of Geoparks.
© Sabino Parente
Would you like to discover the places that are UNESCO World Heritage Sites? All places are easy to reach and well signposted.
© SIP
Family of Man exhibition
In 1955, photographer Edward Steichen, an American of Luxembourg origin, unveiled a collection of 503 photographs taken by 273 artists from 68 countries. Commissioned by the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the exhibition was intended as a manifesto for peace and human equality through post-war humanist photography. It has been on show at the Château de Clervaux since 1994.
© LFT / Romain Girtgen
Satellite communication and imagery
Luxembourg is mobilising its experience in satellite communications and imagery to support emergency responders around the world. The Emergency.lu mobile satellite telecommunications platform, designed for rapid deployment in humanitarian crisis situations, is one of Luxembourg's flagship cooperation projects. Since 2025, Luxembourg has also been supporting UNOSAT, as part of its partnership with UNESCO, to monitor cultural heritage in the event of armed conflict or natural disaster and document damage when it occurs.
© Emergency.lu
The watchtowers, remains of the fortress
The remains of the fortress of Luxembourg City, once known as the “Gibraltar of the North”, dominate the surrounding valleys and offer magnificent panoramic views. Although the old buildings, barracks and fortifications have been modernised, they still retain the charm of a bygone era.
© Vic Fischbach
The Fortress of Luxembourg, World Heritage Site
Built between the 10th and 19th centuries, the Luxembourg fortress characterises the city’s panorama. In 1994, it was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, alongside the old quarters of the Ville-Haute, testifying to the historical importance of this remarkable ensemble.
© Christophe Van Biesen
Meluxina, Luxembourg's supercomputer
Inaugurated in June 2021, the Meluxina supercomputer supports both public and private partners in carrying out complex calculations across a range of sectors. SES, RSS-Hydro and ispace are using it to optimise satellite performance, improve environmental simulations and plan lunar missions. More than 200 companies in 15 economic sectors have already expressed an interest in using Meluxina.
© LuxProvide / EuroHPC
The Philharmonie: hub of cultural performance
The Philharmonie is one of Luxembourg's leading centres for musical performance and production. From classical symphonies to new sounds, it welcomes local artists as well as international stars and ensembles in over 400 performances per season. Its concerts for young audiences and the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra play a key role in attracting a varied local and international audience.
© NON INFORME!
The Sprangpressessioun, UNESCO intangible heritage
Every year on Whit Tuesday, the abbey town of Echternach welcomes thousands of pilgrims and spectators from the region and beyond to attend the Dancing Procession. The participants leap to the rhythm of the musical groups as they make their way to the tomb of Saint Willibrord. Since 2010, the Sprangpressessioun has been part of UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
© LFT / Foto ACPresse
From red matter to grey matter
On the former steel-making wasteland of Esch-Belval, the University of Luxembourg has established itself as a centre of academic and scientific excellence. Alongside research institutions such as the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST), the site combines innovation and industrial heritage, offering a unique setting for teaching, research and technological development.
© LFT / Oliver Raatz
Terres rouges, a Unesco-labelled biosphere
Once an iron ore mining region, the Minett in southern Luxembourg is now one of the most densely populated areas in the country. Right in the heart of the urban centres, the Terres Rouges, a former mining site, has been transformed into a nature reserve, home to an astonishing diversity of flora and fauna.
© LMIH/Focalize
Luxembourg's Commitment to UNESCO Goals
Since its founding in 1945,UNESCO has promoted global peace and sustainable developmentthrough key initiatives in:
Luxembourg plays an active role in UNESCO programmes both nationally and internationally through various networks. Key contributions include:
Luxembourg's UNESCO-commitment is enhanced byHRH the Grand Duchess of Luxembourg, who has been a goodwill ambassador for the organisation since 1997. Her main areas of focus are projects and programmes promoting the education of girls and women around the world, empowering them through microfinance, and protecting children's rights.
As of 2024, UNESCO had 194 member states. Its 58-member Executive Board oversees program execution, with members serving four-year terms.Luxembourg has submitted its candidacy for a seat on the Executive Board for the 2025-2029 term, reinforcing its commitment to UNESCO's mission.
Last update17.07.2025
For more information
Visit UNESCO-heritage in Luxembourg
Luxembourg's eventful history
Objectives and strategy of Luxembourg's cooperation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/belgium-luxembourg-friendship.html
Belgians and Luxembourgers - the things we share.
Luxembourgers and Belgians share a deep and long-lasting friendship based on a common and intertwined history, shared family ties and a regular exchange on all levels. Did you know that Luxembourgers fought for Belgian independence? Or that Belgium's North Sea coast is arguably a Luxembourgish colony during holidays? Or that Luxembourgish artists like working in Belgium? Discover some little-known secrets as to why both countries are so close to each other.
Luxembourgers fought for Belgian independence
It is the early 1830s and the Belgian people are in an open revolt against the Dutch king to assert their rights to self-government. At the same time,Luxembourgers also revolt and join forces with the Belgians.One of the most fervent advocates of an independent and free Belgium is Luxembourger Jean-Baptiste Nothomb, a solicitor and newspaper editor from Pétange. He is seen today as one of the fathers of the Belgian Constitution and goes on to become head of government from 1841 to 1845. In 1839, to the dismay of Nothomb and many Luxembourgers, the Grand Duchy is partitioned, and while the Eastern half remains separate, the Western part becomes what is today Belgium’s Province of Luxembourg.
Belgium and Luxembourg are linked by common interests
Belgium and Luxembourg have been supporting each other for a long time and were even the nucleus to the European single market area.In 1921, both countries signed the Belgian-Luxembourgish Economic Union (UEBL), which created a single marketencompassing both countries.The UEBL was last renewed in 2022and remains a keyston of Belgian-Luxembourgish relations. Some 80 years before the introduction of the Euro, both countries also decided to align their currencies, thus creating asingle currency – the Belgian-Luxembourgish Franc– that was ultimately replaced by the Euro in 2002. Both governments continue to see each other regularly in a format named after the place where they meet: "Gäichel", a small hamlet on the common border. This meeting remains a key element of the concertation of both countries in commercial and economic matters and an important forum for political discussion.
History in pictures
Both governments meet regulary to discuss matters of common interest, such as here in March 2023. The place of meeting is symbolic: the small hamlet of Gäichel on the Belgian-Luxembourgish border.
© ME
Since 1843, 507 bollards have been marking the border between Belgium and Luxembourg. 287 of these are made of cast iron, such as this one, and can be seen dotted around the landscape.
© Bernard Piette
The wedding of Their Royal Highnesses Prince Guillaume and Princess Stéphanie de Lannoy on 20 October 2012 is a memorable event in the history of both countries that served to strengthen their ties.
© Cour grand-ducale / Vic Fischbach
5 children were born from the union between Their Royal Highnesses: Marie-Astrid (1954), Henri (the current Grand Duke, 1955), Jean (1957), Margaretha (1957) and Guillaume (1963).
© Photo Edouard Kutter Jr., photographe de la Cour
Their Royal Highnesses Grand Duke Jean and Grand Duchess Joséphine-Charlotte were married in 1953. Joséphine-Charlotte was the eldest daughter of King Leopold III of Belgium.
© Photo Edouard Kutter, photographe de la Cour
Jean-Baptiste Nothomb (1805-1881) is rememberd in Belgium, among others, for establishing free fundamental eduation. This work from 1830 by painter Jean-Nicolas Bernard depicts Nothomb around the time of the Belgian Revolution.
© MNHA / Tom Lucas
Etienne Plasman, flutist with the OPL, tells us why he loves living in Luxembourg. (Video/Audio)
Virginie Michielsen, President of the Union royale belge luxembourgeoise, compares Luxembourg to Canada and Australia! (Video/Audio)
René Mathieu, distinguished vegetarian chef, takes us to his favourite places in Luxembourg. (Video/Audio)
The family ties are strong between both countries
In 1953,Grand Duke Jean of Luxembourg marries Joséphine-Charlotte, daughter of the Belgian King Leopold III in a fairytale wedding. The Grand Duchess leaves a mark on Luxembourgish society, as head of the Red Cross and the Luxembourg Foundation Against Cancer, but also as an avid collector of contemporary art. She is much loved in her adopted country and when she passes away in 2005, throngs of mourners flock to the capital for her funeral. Today, the next Grand Duchess in waiting is also from a Belgian noble house:Princess Stéphanie de Lannoy married Prince Guillaume, Hereditary Grand Duke, in 2012in anotherwedding to make dreams come true. The family lives a quiet life in Fischbach castle, together with her two sons, Charles and François.
The call of the Belgian beaches
Few know about this, butLuxembourgers and Belgians have regular population exchanges.Luxembourg is only the13th most popular holiday destination for Belgians. However, judging by the number of Belgians hiking through Luxembourg's northern regions each year, it may be one of the most popular for day-trips. On the other hand,Luxembourgers love to spend their vacations on Belgian beaches. During Luxembourgish school holidays, many towns along the Belgian North Sea welcome thousands of Luxembourgers seeking to compensate for their own country's lack of beaches by soaking up the North Sea sun and exploring the shopping opportunities between De Panne and Knokke. Indeed,Belgium is the third most popular tourist destination for Luxembourgers, testament to both countries' long-standing friendship and the ease with which the populations of both countries have been mingling for over a century. With the exception of the odd Belgian or Luxembourgish jokes, of course.
Did you know?
Every day, over 50,000 Belgians cross the border to work in Luxembourg, which equates to roughly 10% of the national workforce. Life without Belgians would simply not be the same.
3 questions for Tina Gillen
A few years ago, artist Tina Gillen made the opposite journey. Born in Luxembourg in 1972, the renowned painter lives and works in Brussels. She exhibits all over the world and represented the Grand Duchy at the 59th International Art Exhibition - La Biennale di Venezia in 2022. In Brussels, her work can usually be seen in theNosbaum Redinggallery.
As a perfect example of the links forged between Belgium and Luxembourg in the field of culture, we had the opportunity to ask her a few questions about her work and her relationship with Belgium.
1. You've lived and worked in Brussels for many years. How did you come to this city and why is it still your main creative centre?
After finishing my studies in Vienna, Austria, I did a Masters in Fine Arts. I went on to study at the Higher Institute for Fine Arts (HISK) in Antwerp for three years. After that I settled in Antwerp and Brussels. Throughout the years, I've built up several professional contacts to increase my exhibition opportunities.
2. In 2022, you represented the Grand Duchy at the Biennale di Venezia with your exhibition "Faraway So Close", which was part of your pictorial research into natural phenomena beyond human control. How did you feel about taking part in this major international exhibition?
After the Biennial was postponed due to the pandemic, the exhibition was particularly eagerly awaited. This was true both for the artists, who had been working in isolation in the meantime, and for the visitors. It was like opening the water fountain again after the drought. It was a gratifying and intense experience.
3. Could you tell us about your forthcoming exhibitions?
After the exhibition at the Konschthal in 2023 in Esch-sur-Alzette, I've been asked to work on several small projects requiring a particular kind of finesse in different formats on the subject of habitat and landscape. In autumn, I'll be exhibiting my work again in Luxembourg at the Nosbaum Reding gallery.
The experiences of a Luxembourger in Belgium
Bozar.
Arriving late by train.
Shrimp croquettes.
Last update31.10.2025
For more information
Population
International openness
History
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/luxembourg-portugal.html
Portugal and Luxembourg – an unwavering partnership
The shared history of Portugal and Luxembourg can be traced back to the 1893 marriage between Prince Guillaume Alexandre de Nassau and Infanta Marie Anne of Portugal. Since then, relations between the two countries have been marked by mutual assistance and hope in difficult times: the grand ducal family took refuge in Portugal during the Second World War, and in the 1960s, many Portuguese citizens settled in Luxembourg for work. Nowadays, the Grand Duchy cannot be understood without taking into account diversity and the strength of the links forged between the two countries over the course of more than a century.
Two countries providing hope in difficult times
More than 125 years have passed since themarriage ofPrinceGuillaume Alexandre de Nassau– who became Grand Duke in 1905 as Guillaume IV –and Infanta Marie Anne of Portugal, who was the daughter of the deposed King of Portugal Miguel I.
The union, which took place in 1893, had a major impact on Luxembourg's history. In fact, the country has had atruly Luxembourgish dynasty– the house of Luxembourg-Nassau – since 1890, and this marriage ensured that the grand ducal line has carried on to the present day. The couple had six daughters, of whom the second, Charlotte, took up the reins of the country in troubled times and succeeded in saving the dynasty from being abolished on two occasions (in 1919, when she acceded the throne, and in 1945, after the Second World War).
This union can therefore be considered to be the starting point for the contemporary history of Portuguese–Luxembourgish relations. In fact, the marriage did not just bring together two individuals, but alsotwo peoples who, since that time, have walked together, helped each other and become countries that provide hope in difficult times.
Alain Welter, a Luxembourgish street artist in Lissabon (Video/Audio)
"De Moler vu Koler"goes Lisbon
Alain Welter, born and raised in Luxembourg, is a street artist  and illustrator. Whether it is a wall, a bus, a bridge, façades, cooling towers, beer bottle labels or commercial spaces, Alain gives the world a touch of colour wherever he can. We interviewed him during his project in Lisbon.
This is a collaboration between theKulturfabrikinEsch-sur-Alzette, theGaleria de Arte Urbana de la Câmara Municipal de Lisboaand theLuxembourg Embassy in Lisbon, in the context of thecapital of culture Esch2022.
Did you know?
At the same time asAlain Welteris creating his urban art fresco in Lisbon, the Portuguese artistMariana Duarte Santosis creating one in Esch-sur-Alzette. The work will be inaugurated during theNuit de la Culture(Night of Culture) from 13 to 15 May 2022.
TheSecond World Warwas a time that strengthened the relationship between Portugal and Luxembourg.The German invasion in 1940meant that the Grand Duchy suddenly lost its sovereignty. The Nuremberg Race Laws were implemented and the German authorities decreed the expulsion of some 2,000 Jews. The German occupation also forced Grand Duchess Charlotte, together with her family and members of the government, to cross the border into France, near Lasauvage.
In those tragic times,Portugal became synonymous with freedom and solidarity. In fact, many refugees from Luxembourg – residents and Jews who had fled to the Grand Duchy before the invasion – found refuge there. ThePortuguese diplomat Aristides de Sousa Mendes, Portugal's consul in Bordeaux, played a key role in helping people in difficulty. Ignoring the orders of his superiors, he provided thousands of visas that were required for leaving France, which was no longer a safe place to act as a host country after the fall of Paris, and returning to Portugal.
"The angel of Bordeaux", as he was known, also issued the necessaryvisas to the Grand Duchess, Prince Felix and their three children, and to the Luxembourgish ministers Pierre Dupong, Joseph Bech and Victor Bodson. The ministers went to Praia das Maças, near the capital, while the grand ducal family stayed atCasa de Santa Maria, in Cascais, the residence of the honorary consul of Luxembourg.
It was there that the Grand Duchess decided to remain in exile, after consulting her ministers and the diplomats of other occupied countries.The sovereign remained in Portugal with her government until October 1940, then made the long journey to the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada. She did not return from exile until 14 April 1945.
Refugees arriving in Portugal in 1940 had an idyllic perception of the country. For them, Vilar Formoso – the country's main land border used at certain times by more than 2,000 people per day – was a symbol of freedom. However, this image did not correspond with reality. In fact,Portugal had set up an authoritarian regime in 1932, under the leadership of Oliveira Salazar,which would last until 1974. Essentially rural, a significant proportion of the population lived in poverty, while censorship and repression silenced those who spoke out against the regime.
Despite the changes that occurred throughout Europe after the Allied victory,Portugal remained a closed-off dictatorship. In the 1960s,many people chose to go abroad to escape poverty or persecution of the Salazar dictatorship.
At that time, Luxembourg became host to many Portuguese. Thebilateral agreement on the employment of Portuguese workers in Luxembourg, which was signed in 1970 and ratified in 1972, provided a framework for the arrival of new Portuguese people and also rectified the situation of illegal immigrants who had arrived previously. The impact of Portuguese immigration on Luxembourg's physical and social landscape is significant: with 93,678 people in 2021,thePortuguese represent 14.50% of the resident population of the Grand Duchy. Nowadays, Luxembourg cannot be understood without taking into account diversity and the strength of the links forged between the two countries, in particular over the course of these last 60 years.
Asecond generationof Portuguese, who are in fact Luxembourgers who share Portuguese roots and cultural references, is now contributing to Luxembourg's social transformation and creativity.
"Portugal and Luxembourg: two countries providing hope in difficult times"
The exhibition is a reminder of Portugal's role during the Second World War as an open door for Luxembourgish refugees and the way in which Luxembourg, decades later, has become a destination for many Portuguese people. Near the end of the exhibition, a contemporary approach makes it possible to better understand the impact of Portuguese immigration on Luxembourg's physical and social landscape, along with diversity and the strength of the links that have been forged between the two countries for more than half a century.
Venue:Galeria de Exposições do Palácio da Cidadela de Cascais
Dates:from 13 May 2022 to 28 August 2022
Two souls in one body
One person from the second generation who has helped to shape Luxembourgish culture is Edmond Oliveira. As the son of a Portuguese immigrant to Luxembourg, this contemporary artist is a close observer of the cultures of both peoples. His exhibitions often feature living and working conditions, problems with integration or language barriers. "It's about going back to my roots, with a portrait of the first generations of Portuguese immigration to Luxembourg", he says.
What is important to him is telling the story of his father, who left Portugal illegally during the Salazar dictatorship, an experience that he used for his part in the exhibition "Portugal et Luxembourg, pays d'espoir en temps de détresse"(Portugal and Luxembourg: two countries providing hope in difficult times).
Of course, theintegration process for new arrivals was more arduous in the 1960s and 1970s. Often from a rural and modest social background, they occupied jobs at the bottom of the social ladder, either in construction or cleaning. This phenomenon has changed with the new waves of migrants and the children of migrants who have already been integrated, with successful completion of training and higher education, and aspiring to better types of jobs.
The photographer Paulo Lobois part of this generation. He came to Luxembourg aged 6-7. In his photos, heshows the impact of the Portuguese presence on the Luxembourgish landscape, a landscape that has certainly prospered over time with the arrival of Portuguese-speaking migrants.
Consequently,the effect of Portuguese immigration, which has enriched multicultural life in the Grand Duchy, is noticeable in everyday life, in culture and even in our way of life. Portuguese cuisine, folk dancing, lusophone media such asRadio LatinaorContacto, the Miss Portugal contest in Luxembourg or thepilgrimage to the Our Lady of Fatima sanctuary in Wiltz: these are just a few examples of how the Portuguese community has shaped modern society in Luxembourg.
The openness of Luxembourgish society towards these immigrants is one of the reasons whya steady number of Portuguese adopt the nationality of their host country. Over the last 10 years, the Grand Duchy has recorded 12,800 cases of Portuguese people acquiring Luxembourgish nationality by naturalisation and by option. This is also a sign that Portuguese residents are happy in Luxembourg.
The Association Amitié Portugal-Luxembourg, a union that highlights the strong relationship between these two peoples, was founded by Luxembourgers in 1969. The exhibition entitled"Portugal et Luxembourg, pays d'espoir en temps de détresse"(Portugal and Luxembourg: two countries providing hope in difficult time) is a wonderful illustration of this relationship and of the deep friendship between these two countries. Each work will certainly highlight the connections that these two nations have been building for decades. However,although the exhibition is short-lived, the friendship between Luxembourg and Portugal is a long-lasting one.
Last update17.10.2025
For more information
The Grand Duke
International openness
History
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/microfinance-luxembourg.html
Microfinance: small amounts, big impact.
In most emerging countries, access to banking services is difficult, and this is a major obstacle to development. Microfinance is seen as one of the main solutions to this problem.
Breaking the vicious circle of poverty in emerging countries is the main mission ofLuxembourg's cooperation. Luxembourg pursues this goal inseven countries, namely Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Laos, Mali, Nicaragua, Niger and Senegal, where it focuses its solidarity effort in the form of subsidies.
In 2019,420.80 million euro- or 1.04% of gross national income (GNI) - was released to support the economic, social (education, training, health) and environmental development of these partner countries, while adapting to their specific situations and needs.
An ecosystem that favours the development of the sector
For more than 20 years, the cooperation has been involved in thefield of microfinance, which has experienced unprecedented development during this time.
Over the years, Luxembourg has even become an essential global hub for this sector through its investments in the creation ofinclusive financeand providing favourable conditions for the emergence of microfinance. Today, almost a third of microfinance investment vehicles (MIVs) are based in Luxembourg, representing more than50% of the sector's assetsunder management worldwide. It should also be noted that approximately 60% of microcredits pass through Luxembourg.
As the inclusive finance sector has arisen, a wide range of players have also emerged in this ecosystem. International partnerships have been forged, institutions and NGOs have flourished, microfinance investment funds have been developed, all benefiting from the labelLuxFlag Microfinance, and even academic training through theMicrofinance Chairis being offered today.
Microfinance in support of the most fragile
Microfinance brings money where there is none. At the origin of this phenomenon, microcredits were mainly granted in the form of small loans to small entrepreneurs or craftsmen. Today, microfinance, or inclusive finance, also benefits households that are close to the poverty line. It provides these people with access tobasic financial servicessuch as credit, savings, money transfer and insurance in order to give them the opportunity to plan for their future, protect themselves against life's risks or increase their autonomy.
Within the framework of Luxembourg's support, finance programmes are mainlyfocused on women and young entrepreneursin rural areas. But inclusive finance, which is one of the pillars ofLuxembourg's En route pour 2030 general strategy, also targets the development of financing and insurance tools in the agricultural sector as well as incombating hunger and malnutrition.
Highlights of microfinance
Bankers for the poor
In the wake of the microfinance sector's strong growth in Luxembourg for more than 20 years now, manyNGOs and institutionshave emerged. The Luxembourg NGOADA (Appui au Développement Autonome), created in 1994, was placed under the High Patronage of Grand Duchess Maria Teresa in 2007. This NGO very soon succeeded in combining the dynamism of the financial centre with development cooperation. With the ambition to become the spearhead of the sector, it is today a key player in the field of microfinance in Luxembourg. The NGO, which is active in some fifty countries, celebrated its 25th anniversary in 2019.
ADA and several other microfinance and inclusive finance players and institutions are hosted in theMaison de la Microfinance: the European microfinance platform (e-MFP), the Luxembourg Inclusive Finance Network (InFine.lu), the Luxembourg Microfinance and Development Fund (LMDF), the Microinsurance Network (MiN) andMicrolux. The latter is the first institution that was established as a public limited company. Microlux targets financial exclusion in Luxembourg and offers microcredits of up to 25,000 euro.
European Microfinance Award
Organised since 2005, theEuropean Microfinance Awardacknowledges innovative projects in inclusive finance and has two objectives: to reward excellence and to identify and disseminate the most relevant practices with a view to their application by others.
Thisprize for excellence, endowed with 100,000 euro, was won byMuktinath Bikas Bank Ltd. Nepal's leading National Development Bank serves low-income households and women in rural areas through a department dedicated to this target population.
Three questions for ...
Govinda Bahadur Raut, assistant CEO/Chief-Small and Micro Banking of Muktinath Bikas Bank
1. You have received the European Microfinance Award 2020. What does this award mean to you?
Since its creation, our organization has been adopting a principle of ''जनता बैंकमा होइन,बैंक जनतामा जानु पर्दछ'' i.e.people do not come to the bank, the bank should go to them. The Muktinath Bikas Bank was an exception at the time of establishment, adopting the microfinance model to reach the lower part of the population as a traditional bank. The bank management was committed to nurturing the poor people to bring them into the mainstream of the financial ecosystem, however, it was costly to provide and continue these services. The bank was guided by its social mission to deliver impactful financial services. The Bank was very clear about Impactful Banking which was not possible without reaching the rural and deprived people. We as bankers without uplifting the living standard of people through various services, cannot be extraordinary bankers in the crowd of regular bankers. This award has been a confirmation of our perseverance and dedication towards our principle and encouraged us to continue to serve our clients/ members.
2. The Prize also made you win €100,000, which is a lot of money in microfinance. How are you going to invest this money?
COVID-19 has been a mirror for all of us. It shows how important digital infrastructure is in times of pandemics. At present, the telecommunication reach is nationwide and the majority of the people carry mobile phones and use 3G or 4G services. Hence, if we are able to communicate with them through mobile phones and deliver services through the same, onboarding those prospective clients to the bank will be quite easy. Further, we can reduce the traveling time of people to come to the bank to avail various banking services. Though the bank has already developed a platform of the first level of digital banking, which still needs a lot of customization to make it easy to use for rural illiterate people as well. Thus, with the money of this award, the bank will work on its digital infrastructure especially improving its SMS services, mobile banking, QR payment system, internet banking, financial cum and digital literacy, as well as its credit score card, always keeping in mind the rural population.
3. How will winning the Microfinance Award impact your work in the future?
The Award provided a platform to showcase our work in front of the whole world, for which MNBBL will always be grateful to the European Microfinance Award. This award not only provided us with recognition but added also responsibility to do better in the future for our customers/clients/members.  In the future, we will reinforce our presence in Nepal through opening more service points and new branches in places where people lack access to financial sectors (like Sudur Paschim (far-western) Province). We will forge a partnership with other EGI  organizations (working on efficiency, growth, and impact). We have already started field visits to various parts of Nepal for identifying locations for branch expansion and the approval process with our central bank is in line. Further, meetings with various organizations working for rural people and smallholders are ongoing. Therefore, this microfinance award has put more energy and fuel into our work and is being vital for making people understand our banking model.
Last update23.01.2026
For more information
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
Humanitarian aid and emergency.lu
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/european-microfinance-award.html
Food security in uncertain times: the winner of this year’s Microfinance Award is Yikri, a microfinance institution (MFI) that is making a vital contribution to food security and quality in Burkina Faso. Read on to find out what makes this initiative stand out and why exactly Luxembourg plays a key role in microfinance.
European Microfinance Award: together for financial inclusion and sustainable development
This year’s winner
Yikri came out on top among a number of remarkable initiatives.
Yikriis a microfinance institution in Burkina Faso, a country that is grappling with some of the highest levels of food insecurity and violence. To help the poorest segments of the population, especially women and their families, Yikri combinesfinancial assistance with training on health, nutrition and agriculture. Its trained employees can recognise signs of malnutrition in mothers and children at any early stage and refer them to subsidized support programmes. Yikri also provides agricultural loans and educates people on how to increase their earnings in an environmentally friendly way.
European microfinance award 2023
The 2023 European Microfinance Award ceremony in Luxembourg.
© EIB
The three finalists: (left to right) Fundación Génesis Empresarial; Fortune Credit Ltd; unk..; Yikri; H.R.H. the Grand Duchess, unk.
© Xantor SA
© Grey Skies Productions
(l. to r.) Claire Lossiane/Sawdogo, executive director; Daouda Barro, administrative and human resources manager
© Yikri
Yikri offers training courses on health, nutrition and agriculture.
© Yikri
Close support is provided by way of individual visits and ...
© Yikri
... monthly group training sessions.
© Yikri
The two other finalists
The institutions which came second and third also deserve a mention.
An award based on cooperation
Since 2006, the European Microfinance Award has been granted to honour outstanding achievements in the field of microfinance. The Award is organised, inter alia, by the Luxembourg Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (MAEE), the European Microfinance Platform (e-MFP) and the Inclusive Finance Network in Luxembourg (InFiNe.lu).Together with partner countries, Europe supports microfinance innovation through this awardin order to promote social justice and financial inclusion.
At this year’s edition, a total of41 applicants were assessed over several stages. First of all, the Selection Committee chose ten semi-finalists before narrowing down the selection to the top three candidates. The finalists were then appraised by a Grand Jury, comprising HRH Grand Duchess Maria Teresa of Luxembourg among others, to determine the winner. The award ceremony was held at the European Investment Bank in Luxembourg on 16 November 2023, during European Microfinance Week (EMW 2023).
Honourable mentions
Below is a list of theseven semi-finalists:
The semi-finalists
© Any Chi Em
© Annapurna
© Co-operative Bank of Kenya
© The First Micro Finance Bank Syria
© Friendship Bridge
© MicroLoan Foundation Malawi
© Sinapi Aba
A key topic for development
Food security and quality was chosen as this year’s theme, to tie in with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for 2030. The competition focused on theincreasing numbers of people struggling with hunger, malnutrition and poor food quality.
Key aspects of financial inclusion, such as saving, investment and financial planningtypically increase needy people’s ability to purchase top-quality food. Service providers in the field of financial inclusion therefore play a crucial role, not only by supporting the production and distribution of food, but also by improving the living conditions of people in need.
Last update25.01.2024
For more information
Microfinance: small amounts, big impact.
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/presidents-eu.html
The Luxembourg Presidents of the European Commission
The European Commission is the executive body of the European Union. As such, the Commission in particular proposes new legislation, draws up the budget, ensures compliance with European law and represents the EU externally. It consists of one Commissioner per EU Member State and is headed by the President of the Commission who decides on the allocation of responsibilities. Luxembourg, as a founding member of the European Union, has so far provided 3 Presidents of the European Commission: Gaston Thorn (1981-1985), Jacques Santer (1995-1999), and Jean-Claude Juncker (2014-2019).
Gaston Thorn
During his term in office as head of the EU executive (6 January 1981 to 5 January 1985),Gaston Thornwas particularly involved in the negotiations on the second enlargement of the Community to include Spain and Portugal.
Jacques Santer
WhileJacques Santerwas its president (23 January 1995 to 15 September 1999), the European Commission made progress on a number of European issues, such as the introduction of the euro, the enlargement of the EU to include countries in Central and Eastern Europe, and employment policy.
Jean-Claude Juncker
From 1 November 2014 to 30 November 2019 Jean-Claude Juncker is President of the European Commission. He is the first president of the European Commission to be elected to the post by the European Parliament.
Last update15.07.2025
For more information
Luxembourg, home of European institutions
Robert Schuman and the beginnings of the European Union
Monarchy and institutions
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/benelux.html
Benelux Union
The Benelux Union is an intergovernmental cooperation agreement that was established in 1944. The acronym 'Benelux' incorporates the names of the three participating countries (Belgium, The Netherlands, Luxembourg). This tripartite union, which can be seen as the forerunner to European integration, now focuses on three key areas: economy, sustainable development and justice.
An eventful shared history
The three countries, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg, share a long history. For over half a century, the king of the Netherlands also bore the title of Grand Duke of Luxembourg. In 1921, after World War I, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg entered into a customs and monetary agreement with Belgium, forming theBelgo-Luxembourg Economic Union(BLEU).
In 1944, during World War II, the governments of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg - still in exile in London - signed acustoms union agreement. This customs union entered into force on 1st January 1948.It waived import duties on trade exchangewithin the union and set a foreign trade tariff.
Established by the treaty of 3 February 1958 for an initial period of fifty years, theBenelux Economic Union sought to broaden and deepen economic cooperation among the three countries. The principle objectives included, in particular:
The Benelux Treaty was implemented in 1960.
What about today?
50 years later, in view of the expiry of the Treaty of 1958 in 2010, a new treaty amending the treaty of 1958 was signed on 17 June 2008 for an undetermined period. Under this treaty, the Benelux cooperationnow known as the 'Benelux Union'focuses onthree main areas:
Benelux has often served as a model for reinforcing European ties. Indeed, some areas of cooperation have been so successful that their application has been extended to the European level. This applies in particular to the free movement of persons (Schengen Agreements), the internal market (Economic Union) or police cooperation.
Operation
The Benelux operates through several institutions:
Last update20.12.2024
For more information
Luxembourg and the Greater Region
The Schengen Agreements – dreaming a Europe without borders
Openness to the world
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/grande-region.html
Luxembourg and the Greater Region
The Greater Region is located in the heart of Europe, on the road and railroad axis that links the Mediterranean region to the North Sea. Its 11.6 million inhabitants, spread over an area of 65,401 sq.km. (about the same size as Lithuania), generate a GDP of 390 billion euros (figure for 2017) – 2.5% of the overall GDP of the European Union.
With about 220,000 cross-border workers, the Greater Region is amodel within Europe in terms of the free movement of people, goods and services.
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is the only sovereign state in this cross-border region, which includes:
The population of the Grand Duchy only accounts for 5% of the total population of this cross-border region, but it boasts themost dynamic growthand an open labour market, making the Grand Duchy the economic driving force of the Greater Region.
The idea at the heart of the project
The first Greater Region summit was held in Mondorf-les-Bains (in the Grand Duchy) in 1995. At that summit, the partner countries expressed their ambition tobuild an integrated area of cooperation in the service of its inhabitants, its economy, and its territory. The participants considered themselves testing grounds for the process of European integration.
Cooperation within the Greater Regionfocuses on the following main areas:
Since 1995, Greater Region summits have been held regularly every 24 months; they are attended by representatives of each of the Greater Region's partners. The purpose of these meetings at the highest political level is to inject fresh momentum into cross-­border and inter-regional cooperation within the Greater Region.
The partners serve in turn as presidents of the Greater Region, each for a period of 24 months.
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
Openness to the world
Employment in Luxembourg
Luxembourg's territory
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/key-projects-development-cooperation.html
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
With 1% of the country's gross national income (GNI) invested in it, development aid is a matter of great importance to the Grand Duchy. The Grand Duchy carries out a wide range of bi- and multilateral projects in many countries, all over the world. Key projects are being carried out in Burkina Faso, Laos and Nicaragua, for example.
Priority partner countries
On average, the Grand Duchy's Official Development Assistance (ODA) devoted tobilateral cooperation represents 70% of all its contributions. The remaining 30% is allocated to multilateral cooperation projects.
To achieve greater effectiveness and more impact for its policy, Luxembourg pursues anapproach that favours geographical concentration. As a result, special, long-term relations are maintained with alimited number of priority partner countries:
On average, more than50% of the Grand Duchy's bilateral ODA is invested in these seven countries, which all fall within the category of the poorest and least advanced countries in the world.
Education and training in Burkina Faso
There are long-standing close links between the Grand Duchy and Burkina Faso. The cooperation project in this part of west Africa is mainly involved in the field of education and vocational training, with a system for funding apprenticeships and specialist training. By helping young people to find forward-looking opportunities in Burkina Faso, the Grand Duchy hopes to stem the flow of often dangerous journeys these young people make to reach Europe.
Development of human and natural resources in Laos
Laos has been one of the Grand Duchy's partner countries for cooperation since 1997. The cooperation programme is mainly focused on reducing poverty and helping Laos shed its status as one of the world's least developed countries. To achieve this, particular emphasis is placed on good governance, health, education, and integrated rural development.
Download the brochure onthe Grand Duchy's cooperation in Laos.
Tourist industry and health sector in Nicaragua
Nicaragua has experienced considerable positive development since cooperation began in 1990. In order to maintain this path of progress, the Grand Duchy is focusing its support on vocational training, responsible and sustainable entrepreneurship, and the tourist industry. In addition, the health sector, with a special attention to maternal and child health, is supported in cooperation with the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO).
Download the brochure onthe Grand Duchy's cooperation in Nicaragua(in French).
Last update19.08.2025
For more information
Action humanitaire et emergency.lu
Objectifs et stratégie de la coopération luxembourgeoise
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/robert-schuman.html
Robert Schuman and the beginnings of the European Union
The beginnings of the European Union we know today date back to the 1950s. Luxembourg was very interested when Robert Schuman, French Foreign Affairs Minister, proposed in 1950 to bring the production of coal and steel from Germany and France under a common High Authority and independent of governments.
Robert Schuman, a Luxembourger by birth
Robert Schuman was born in Luxembourg in 1886. His father was a customs officer from Lorraine of German nationality and his mother was Luxembourger. Hismother tongue was Luxembourgish. Without a doubt, the combination of Lëtzebuergesch, German and French influences motivated him to launch a plan that was to culminate in the creation of the first European Community.
Like other founding fathers of Europe, he came from a border region and, having witnessed two world wars devastate Europe, was determined to prevent France and Germany from entering into armed conflict ever again. In fact, the region never witnessed the passage of armies again.
The Schuman Plan
On 9 May 1950, Robert Schuman, inspired by a plan drawn up by Jean Monnet, suggested to the German chancellor Konrad Adenauer theestablishment of a supranational authority that would be competent in the field of heavy industry.
While this plan focused on two specific sectors of the economy, its main purpose was political. Its objective was to place a permanent obstacle in the path of any state intent on taking advantage of its coal and steel resources in order to rearm. Nevertheless, Robert Schuman was aware that the construction of a unified Europe would take time: 'Europe will not be made all at once'.
The founding members of the European Community were France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg. The first European Community was called the 'Schuman Plan' for some, 'ECSC' (European Coal and Steel Community) for others.
Europe Day
Europe Day is celebrated on 9th Mayin the member states of the European Union (EU) to commemorate theSchuman Declaration of 9May.Since 2019, this day is celebrated doubly inLuxembourg. Indeed, on 27 March, the Chamber of Deputies unanimously adopted the declaration of9 Mayas anofficial holiday. While showing its commitment to the project of fraternity and solidarity that the EU represents, Luxembourg is takinga pioneering  role:to date, it is the only Member State to have instituted this day as an official holiday.
Europa Experience Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
Europa Experience in Luxembourg
Curious to learn more about how Europe works?Visit the Europa Experience. Find out how the European Union works and the impact that decisions taken by the Parliament, Commission and Council have on your life. Listen to other citizens talk about how European policies shape their daily lives. Find out how you can make a difference and make your voice heard.
Admission is free.
Last update15.07.2025
For more information
The Schengen Agreements – dreaming a Europe without borders
Luxembourg, home of European institutions
Openness to the world
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/humanitarian-aid.html
Humanitarian aid and emergency.lu
The emergency.lu rapid deployment mobile satellite telecommunications platform is one of the flagship projects of the Luxembourg Cooperation. First deployed in 2012 in response to the humanitarian crisis following the civil war in South Sudan, it is now in action in Ukraine.
emergency.lu, a platform that does not lack air
With theemergency.luproject Luxembourg is offering arapid response satellite communicationsystem for natural disasters and humanitarian missions worldwide. This mobile satellite communication system can be deployed within twelve hours of the alert being given.
Its primary objective is torestore or strengthen communicationsin a crisis situation to support the coordination of relief efforts and make the emergency response of the humanitarian community more effective.
After first deploying a terminal in 2012 in response to the humanitarian crisis following the civil war in South Sudan, other terminals have been erected inmore than 20 different locationsaround the world.
Current deployments include the pre-positioning of two terminals inPolandfor deployment toUkrainein response to Russian aggression, and an operation inTongafollowing the volcanic eruption that disrupted undersea fibre links.
The emergency.lu platform, which has been in existence for ten years now, was conceived and developed in the form of a public-private partnership, based onLuxembourg's skills and know-how in the field of ICT. Its financing from development cooperation budgets allows the Grand Duchy to offer it as a globalpublic goodto the international community.
‘emergency.lu’ takes action in Mayotte
In response to the extensive damage caused by tropical cyclone Chido, which hit the whole of the island of Mayotte in December 2024, Luxembourg has deployed two ‘emergency.lu’ satellite communication systems to support humanitarian efforts on the ground. This intervention was initiated at the request of the French government through the European Union's civil protection mechanism.
The Grand Ducal Fire and Rescue Service (CGDIS) was responsible for transporting the two systems to Paris, from where they will be sent to Mayotte by the French authorities. The deployment of the two emergency.lu systems is being supervised by two French technicians who recently took part in a training course on humanitarian connectivity organised in and by Luxembourg.
The three areas of humanitarian aid in the Luxembourg development cooperation
In the event of crises or disasters, Luxembourg's humanitarian action covers the three main phases of the intervention cycle:emergency aid, reconstruction support and prevention. This is always done in accordance with the fundamental humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence.
With its humanitarian aid, the Grand Duchy can launch priorityemergency relief inthe event of humanitarian disasters, natural disasters or violent conflicts. Emergency relief is intended to meet the basic needs of people in distress.
This is followed by atransition stageaimed at laying the foundations for the resumption of everyday activities byreconstructing destroyed communityand private infrastructures andrehabilitating basic services and means of subsistence.
Humanitarian aid also includes a third element, i.e.resilience and prevention. Itconsists of preparing communities at risk for likely crises and disasters by strengthening their socio-economic capacity and resistance and bysetting up an environment more conducive to their sustainable development.
Fundamental humanitarian principles
Luxembourg's humanitarian aid is devised on the basis of compliancewith four fundamentalhumanitarian principles, i.e.:
Last update09.01.2025
For more information
Objectives and strategy of Luxembourg's cooperation
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/eu-institutions.html
Luxembourg, home of European institutions
Luxembourg City, home to European institutions since 1952, is one of the three institutional seats of the European Union. Located in the heart of Western Europe, the Grand Duchy offers the advantages of its multilingualism, quality of life and ease of access.
One of three European capitals
The night of the24 to 25 July 1952was to enter into the history books.After 18 hours of talks, Joseph Bech, then Luxembourg's Minister of Foreign Affairs, suggested that the High Authority of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), a first stepping stone towards the European Union, should begin its work in Luxembourg. The seat of the High Authority of the ECSCremained in Luxembourg until 1968, i.e. until the merger of the executive bodies of the ECSC, European Economic Community and Euratom, from which the European Commission evolved.
From 1968 to 1980, the European Investment Bank (EIB) had its offices in the building at 2, Place de Metz, Luxembourg. The building was subsequently purchased by the Caisse d’Épargne de l’État de Luxembourg bank and leased to the EIB until 1980, when the EIB moved to its own premises on the Kirchberg Plateau.
Today, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers have their seat in Brussels. Strasbourg has been confirmed as the seat of the European Parliament, butmost financial and legal European institutions have their headquarters in Luxembourg. In April, June and October, the Council of the European Union holds its sessions in the Grand Duchy.
European institutions, agencies and bodies established in Luxembourg
Luxembourg hosts a large numberof European institutions, agencies and bodies, including in particular:
Two European Schools of Luxembourg (EEL IandEEL II) are intended primarily for children of the staff of the European institutions. In addition, 6 accredited European Schools are equitably distributed throughout the country.
Working and living in Luxembourg
Would you like to work for the European institutions in Luxembourg and join the 14,000 EU nationals already working there? The Grand Duchy is synonymous with quality of life! And this is also regularly confirmed by international benchmarks, such as the Mercer Quality of Living.
Working and living in Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
European institution buildings on the Kirchberg plateau
Most of the European institutionspresent in the Grand Duchy are located in the 'European quarter'on the Kirchberg plateau. They employ over 14,000 people from every part of the European Union. With itsrich and varied architecture, the Kirchberg plateau isin constant flux; indeed it is to provide a home for new European institutions in the near future.
The 'Porte de l'Europe'
Visitors arriving from the city centre pass through the 'Porte de l'Europe', agateway to the Kirchberg plateau.
In addition to the imposing two towers framing the Avenue John F. Kennedy, the 'Porte de l'Europe' alsoincludes the 'Place de l'Europe',the centre of the European quarter lined with notable buildings including theheadquarters of the Court of Justice of the European Unionand theAlcide de Gasperi Tower.
The Alcide de Gasperi Tower
The Alcide de Gasperi Tower (Council of the European Union) was inaugurated in 1966 and was the first building specifically built in the Grand Duchy to meet the requirements of the European institutions. It was the firsthigh-rise building in the Grand Duchy, hence its nickname of the 'Skyscraper' (Héichhausin Luxembourgish).
While the upper floors currently house the offices of various ministries, thelower section is now part of theEuropean Conference Centre Luxembourg (ECCL), where the European Union's ministerial meetings are held in April, June and October.
The 'Palais' and the 'Twin Towers'
Thejudicial institutions of the European Unionhave been located in Luxembourg City ever since their creation in 1952. After occupying various buildings in the city centre, the services of theCourt of Justice of the European Unionhave been located on the Kirchberg plateau since 1973.
The'Palais de la Cour', seat of judicial institutions, was expanded several times before being integrated into the 'Twin Towers'.
The two towers were joined by a third tower, which was inaugurated in September 2019 by the President of the CJEU Koen Lenaerts in the presence of HRH the Grand Duke of Luxembourg and Xavier Bettel, Prime Minister of Luxembourg. Currently, the third tower of the CJEU is the tallest building in Luxembourg.
The Jean Monnet buildings
Theadministrative services of theEuropean Commissionare housed in the Grand Duchy. From 1975 onwards, these services shared theJean Monnet buildingwith other European institutions including theTranslation Centreand the statistics serviceEurostat.
However, the building no longer meets operational requirements, and is currently under deconstruction; the various services are in substitute accommodation. Thefuture Jean Monnet IIbuilding, for which construction work beganin the spring of 2018, will offer almost twice the area to accommodate more than 3,600 officials, enabling the European Commission's services in Luxembourg to be brought together in one single building.
Europa Experience Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
The Robert Schuman and Konrad Adenauer buildings
TheHemicycle in the Robert Schuman building, built between 1970 and 1973,  was thefirst seat of the European Parliamentwhen it was instituted in 1979, before being moved to Strasbourg definitively two years later.
TheEuropean Parliament is still present on the Kirchberg plateau, which is home to part of  its General Secretariat. The Konrad Adenauer Building of the Secretariat of the European Parliament is currently being refurbished and extended in order to unite all the services of the Secretariat. The first phase of the project has been finished and works for the second part are ongoing.
The judicial institutions of the European Union
The judicial institutions of the European Union have been located in Luxembourg ever since their creation in 1952. After occupying various buildings in the city center, the services of the Court of Justice of the European Union have been located on the Kirchberg plateau since 1973.
The financial institutions of the European Union
The main financial institutions of the European Union are also located in the Grand Duchy.
TheEuropean Investment Bank(EIB), an important financial institution in the European Union's system, has its main headquarters on the Kirchberg plateau. The main building, which was built in 1980, was extended several times and for the last time in 2008 and the EIB is currently building a third extension along Boulevard Konrad Adenauer.
The Kirchberg is also home to theEuropean Court of Auditors(ECA) – the financial supervisory body of the EU– and theEuropean Stability Mechanism(ESM), that was established following the 2008-2009 economic crisis.
Last update23.01.2026
For more information
The Schengen Agreements – dreaming a Europe without borders
Robert Schuman and the beginnings of the European Union
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/objectives-cooperation.html
Objectives and strategy of Luxembourg's cooperation
Luxembourg's cooperation pursues the main objective to reduce and, in the long run, completely eradicate extreme poverty by supporting sustainable development in economic, social and environmental terms.
A new general strategy
While the number of people living in extreme poverty slightly declined in 2018, half of the world's poor remains trapped in 'fragile' situations that are often marked by conflicts. Today, development cooperation must face a heightened complexity and interdependence when it comes to challenges, such as migration, armed conflicts, pandemics and climate change. As a result, Luxembourg's cooperation has designed anew general strategy.
Luxembourg's new strategy has evolved from sectoral prioritisation to a more inclusiveapproach based on the principle of 'leaving no one behind'of the United Nations'2030 Agendaand centred on the following four priority themes:
These topicareas rely on Luxembourg's expertise, in particular in the field of education, professional training, health and rural development. At the same time, in order to achieve innovative projects, Luxembourg relies in particular on its comparative advantages, in other words its international financial centre and skills in the ICT sector.
Thefour priority topics lined up on the 2030 Agendaare, in particular, aimed at contributing to significant progress regarding the achievement of the12 following sustainable developmentgoals:
Last update25.01.2024
For more information
Multimedia
Humanitarian aid and emergency.lu
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness/schengen-agreements.html
The Schengen Agreements – dreaming a Europe without borders
Schengen is a small village on the Luxembourg Moselle, located on the Luxembourg-France-Germany tri-border area. For most people however, it is a symbol of the free movement of people and goods and the suppression of borders in Europe.
Schengen - a European village (Video/Audio)
Key dates of the agreements
On14 June 1985the five member states of the European Community signed theSchengen Agreement, suppressing border controls of people and goods. The signature took place on the cruise ship M.S. Marie-Astrid while moored at the quay in the charming wine-village of Schengen.
Five years later, on19 June 1990, theSchengen Conventionwas signed by the five same member states, once again in the Moselle village. The convention completes the agreements and defines the scope of application and warranties of the implementation of free movement. It did not come into effect until 1995.
In 2017, the European Commission announced thatthe village of Schengen had been selectedby an independent committee of expertsto bear the European Heritage Label.The label is awarded to sites considered as markers of Europe's shared values, history and cultural heritage and contributors to national and regional diversity. The label is intended to strengthen the sense of belonging of European citizens – particularly young people – to the European Union, and to stimulate intercultural dialogue.
Photos
Moselle valley
© SIP / Marc Schoentgen, all rights reserved
Signature of the Schengen Agreements on the Marie-Astrid.
© European Museum Schengen
Schengen Agreements Monument
On the esplanade along the Moselle in Schengen, three steel memorials commemorate the signature of the Schengen Agreements in 1985 and 1990. The wine-growing village of Schengen was eventually chosen for the signature ceremony of the Schengen Agreements because it is located on the border between France, Germany and Luxembourg as a member of the Benelux Economic Union (thus the first five signatories to the protocol).
European Museum Schengen
Inaugurated on 13 June 2010, 25 years after the signature of the Schengen Agreements,the European Museum Schengenis dedicated to the history and significance of the Schengen Agreements. On a surface of 200m2, a permanent exhibition shows visitors that the abolition of internal border controls was the beginning of the implementation of one of the four fundamental liberties that had been laid down by the Treaty of Rome of 1957.
Last update15.07.2025
For more information
Robert Schuman and the beginnings of the European Union
Luxembourg, home of European institutions
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/eurovision-song-contest.html
Luxembourg at the Eurovision Song Contest
Read the article
Under the mottoUnited By Music, theEurovision Song Contest (ESC)brings together nations from across Europe and beyond every year, celebrating theircommunity spirit, openness and diversity. Did you know that Luxembourg has been part of the ESC since its beginnings in 1956, andwith five wins, it's one of the competition's most successful participants?Step into the spotlight of Luxembourg's Eurovision history with us.
Music connects people
Shaped by reconstruction, cooperation between nations and the pursuit of lasting peace, the European broadcasting landscape in the 1950s sought innovative ways tostrengthen transnational connections and promote shared radio and TV programmes. In 1955, Marcel Bezençon, Director of theEuropean Broadcasting Union (EBU), came up with the idea of organising an international music competition for which each participating country would send its own entry. The first edition of theGrand Prix Eurovision de la Chanson Européenne– as the Eurovision Song Contest was called at the time – was held in 1956 in Lugano, Switzerland. Luxembourg was one of the very first countries to take part right from the start, together with just six others.
While the early editions were primarily followed on the radio, the competition developed over the years intoone of the largest live TV events in European television. More and more countries joined the show, expanding the international audience beyond Europe’s borders. The elaborate stage shows and memorable songs have since enchanted millions of viewers every year, with 163 million alone for the 2024 edition!
Themusical diversity, creative staging and cultural representationthat each country brings with its entry make the Eurovision Song Contest unique and impressively showcase what defines the European community year after year.
Guinness World Record for the ESC
Did you know that the Eurovision Song Contest holds theGuinness World Recordfor the longest running annual TV music competition? The ESC has been staged 69 times since its début in 1956. The only year the competition did not run was 2020, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. Luxembourg has taken part in the contest 39 times, most recently in 2025 in Basel.
Luxembourg and the ESC: a success story
Despite its small size, the Grand Duchy has always proven throughout ESC history that it can think big in terms of music. Having racked up five wins and various other top positions on the leader board,Luxembourg is the sixth most successful participating countryin the contest, just behind the Netherlands (5th place), France (4th place), the UK (3rd place), Sweden (2nd place) and Ireland (1st place).
Luxembourg’s five ESC winners:
TOP 10 entries from Luxembourg at the Eurovision Song Contest (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg has hosted the Eurovision Song Contest four times altogether, not only delighting viewers with its music but also impressing them with its elaborate shows in Villa Louvigny and the Grand Théâtre. The Luxembourgish organisers opted for elaborate lighting and stage effects, as well as technical innovations in live broadcasts, whose use was revolutionary for the time and had a lasting impact on the show.
The last time that Luxembourg hosted the ESC was in 1984, after Corinne Hermès’ victory. The then 19-year-old Désirée Nosbusch – now an internationally renowned and successful actress and director – hosted the event in several different languages.
Return to the Eurovision stage after 31 years
After Luxembourg last participated in the Eurovision Song Contest in 1993, the country withdrew completely from the competition. It wasn't until2024, after a 31-year break, that Luxembourg made its major comebackon the ESC stage.
The newly introducedLuxembourg Song Contest (LSC)has since served as the national selection, in which the audience votes together with an international jury to choose Luxembourg's ESC entry. In recent years, the competition has given many talented artists the opportunity to win over the audience.
In 2024, singer Tali won the LSC with her powerful song "Fighter"and achieved a strong 13th place for Luxembourg in Malmö (Sweden).In 2025, Laura Thorn represented the Grand Duchy in the Eurovision final in Basel (Switzerland)and finished in 22nd place with her France Gall tribute "La Poupée Monte le Son."
2026: Eva Marija in Vienna
This year, Luxembourg continues its Eurovision journey with the young singerEva Marija. At the LSC, she impressed with thesong "Mother Nature"— not only with her vocal talent, but also on the violin. The Luxembourger of Slovenian roots has been making music since the age of three and is currently studying songwriting at the Institute for Contemporary Music Performance in London.
We're keeping our fingers crossed for Eva Marija for theESC semi-finals on12 and 14 Mayin Vienna, followed by thegrand final on16 May. Until then: make sure to give "Mother Nature" a listen — it's a real earworm!
Laura Thorn - La Poupée Monte Le Son (LIVE) | Luxembourg 🇱🇺 | Grand Final | Eurovision 2025 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Eva Marija - Mother Nature | Luxembourg 🇱🇺 | National Final Performance | #Eurovision2026 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update26.03.2026
For more information
Rock, Pop, et cetera - popular music genres
Luxembourg City Film Festival
Top 5: artistic creations and initiatives that have left their mark on contemporary art in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/bauhareprais-oai-2024.html
Prix maître d'ouvrage 2024
301 private and public contracting parties from Luxembourg took part in the 2024 edition of theBauhärepräisOAI. ThePrix maître d'ouvrage(owner's award) rewards winners in nine categories and five special prizes. Discover the know-how and architectural works which showcase building culture and the quality of our community life.
Fostering talent and creativity
At the seventh edition of this flagship event of the "Baukultur" in Luxembourg, the jury announced11 winners, 11 runners-up and five special prizes.Two prizes were awarded by the general public.The winners - both private and residential housing - all manifest anunderstanding of heritage, ecology and accessibility.The remarkable and sustainable achievements nurture a culture of building, town and country planning and urban development in Luxembourg.
Pierre Hurt, OAI director
The awards
Thenine categoriesare:
Winners
Landewyck Building by Landimmo Real Estate Sàrl
Project: administrative building, workplace or health centre
© Landimmo
Äerdschëff Asbl
Project: technical and energy equipment, ...
© Christof Weber
City of Esch-sur-Alzette
Project: car-free neighbourhood
© Lukas Roth
Pasam Sci
Project: collective housing
© Pasam Sci
Hammes-Steichen Family
Project: history, community and generations
© Linda Blatzek Fotografie
Cercle Cité - Agence luxembourgeoise d'action culturelle
Projekt: Inneneinrichtung
© Cercle Cité, Mike Zenari
Park on the ban de Gasperich by the City of Luxembourg
Project: town and country planning or landscaping
© Schmitt GlobalView
Centre de compétences génie technique du bâtiment et parachèvement
Project: commercial, craft or industrial building
© GTB/PAR
Vëlodukt  by the National Roads Administration
Project: art projects or infrastructure
© Eric Chenal
Fonds du Logement
Project: collective housing
© Fonds du Logement
Floater by City of Dudelange
Project: educational, cultural or sports building
© Ville de Dudelange
Runners-up
Biomass power station by the municipality of Niederanven
Mention
© Bruck & Weckerle Architekten
WF by Gilles Feidt
Mention
© CCA
Affordable housing in a building classified as national heritage by the City of Dudelange
Mention
© C. Schwarz
Redesign of the Place Kinnen as shared space by the City of Dudelange
Mention
© Marc Lazzarini
Social housing at Schrassig by the municipality of Schuttrange
Mention
© Rhau.lu
VEWA creative space by the City of Dudelange
Mention
© Serge Ecker
Town Hall by the City of Esch-sur-Alzette
Mention
© Jim Clemes Associates SA
Pedestrian footbridge at Luxembourg Railway Station by Société nationale des chemins de fer luxembourgeois
Mention
© Lukas Huneke
The Bronze Gate by Grossfeld Immobilière SA
Mention
© Lukas Roth
Renovation of the Möllerei building by the Fonds Belval
Mention
© Fonds Belval
Vauban Residence by Feltes & Associés Promotion
Mention
© Feltes & Associés Promotion
While the ultimate function of a building determines the category in which it can be entered,the five special prizes are awarded to projects that, in the opinion of the jury, display strong,impressive, exemplary, qualitative, functional and contemporary characteristics.
The two People's Choice Awards, with 3,402 unique voteswere awarded to both a single-family dwelling and a residential housing project.
Special prizes
HMC League sheltered workshops in Capellen by the Public Building Administration
Special prize: accessibility
© Christof Weber
Artists' accommodation by Neimënster
Special Jury Prize
© RMarchi
Villa Kutter by Mr and Mrs Dureau
Special prize: heritage
© Eric Chenal
Registration Duties by Public Buildings Administration
Special prize: exemplary renovation
© Mathilde Magne
Domaine Claude Bentz
Special prize: courage of the project owner
© Studio Jil Bentz
People's Choice Awards
Aster residence
Public prize: collective housing
© Julien Swol
Hammes-Steichen Family
Project: history, community, generations
© frei(Raum) Architekten
AboutBauhärepräisOAI
Organised by theOrdre des architectes et des ingénieurs-conseils- OAI (Order of Architects and Consulting Engineers), the prize has been awarded every four years since 2000. It rewards private and public contracting parties who showcase architecture, engineering and town planning in the Grand Duchy through the creation of successful, high-quality projects that are born out of a bond of trust with the designers or clients.
The nine categories of theBauhärepräisOAI cover the five professions represented by the OAI: architecture, consulting engineering, urban planning, interior design and landscape architecture or engineering.
Projects submitted to theBauhärepräisOAI by their contracting parties (members of the Order of Architects and Consulting Engineers ) must have a connection with the Grand Duchy: either through the origin of their developer or through their presence in Luxembourg.
The jury is composed of international and national actors from the fields of politics and culture. They are chosen by the organiser.
Last update29.11.2024
For more information
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Quality of life and living together in Luxembourg
Third places and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (II)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/artwork-art-contemporary-critic-liberty-openness-luxembourg.html
Top 5: artistic creations and initiatives that have left their mark on contemporary art in Luxembourg
Art can arouse a wide range of emotions and is open to various interpretations. Certain artists, through their work, strive to provoke debate and contribute to critical thinking in society. In this article, we will present five works of art which, since the year of culture in 1995, seem to have pushed the boundaries of art in the Grand Duchy. By raising questions and controversies, they bear witness to the openness and artistic freedom - essential principles of creativity in Luxembourg!
Art is also about tolerance
Let us take you back to1995 when Luxembourg city was the European Capital of Culture. During theprocession at the end of theOctave(an annual period of prayer and introspection),pilgrims walked past a veiled sculpture in theAvenue de la Porte-Neuve.This mysterious artwork was not created by the artist coupleChristo and Jeanne-Claude, who were known for their large-scale, site-specific installations that involved wrapping buildings in fabric. Instead, it wasa sculpture by the Franco-American artistNiki de Saint Phallethat had been hidden under a cover by a local authority employee.
Was "La Grande Tempérance" too provocative for religious believers?This "Nana", with her opulent, colourful and concealed forms, certainly caused a stir! She even found herself at the centre of a parliamentary question about freedom of expression and censorship.
In the end, it wasn't what it looked like.The sculpture was part of a series of 11 works of artwhich adorned the capital's public spaces from 30 May to 15 September. They were installed one by one, butthey could only be unveiled together at the official opening.Therefore, "La Grande Tempérance" was covered up on the day of the procession.
Today,the "Nana" stands proud in the parkof theVillaVauban, where she continues to dance in all her splendour.
Is it art or can we get rid of it?
After much debate, the initial project for theMudam– Musée d'Art Moderne Grand-Duc Jeandesigned by the famous Chinese-American architect Ieoh Ming Pei was split in two: The Fortress Museum – today known as theMusée Dräi Eechelen- and the Mudam. The building is located on the site of the Fort Thüngen in Kirchberg and has approximately 4,800m2 of public space and exhibition areas.Construction began in 1999, with a budget of € 88 million. The budget allocated to art acquisitions in 2005 was € 825,000.
The inaugural exhibition, which was held in early July 2006, was called"Eldorado". It presented a panorama of contemporary creativity: paintings, sculptures, art installations, new media, photographs and other works by around sixty artists. Amongst these works, was a piece by New York artistJoe Scanlancalled "Pay Dirt" (2003).The installation, was made from coffee grounds, gypsum, sawdust, bone powder and salt minerals.It didn't appeal to everyone's tastes and expectations, and many people believed it has no place in this museum. The compost, a criticism of consumer society, is described asjust a mound of earth; it became the symbol of the "Pei-Musee" which, according to its critics, was not worth taxpayers' money.
Today, the work of art remains part of thecollectionof the Mudam. The museum has since become one of the region's most renowned museums with an international reputation.
The difference in perception of an artwork
Plagiarism, vile parody, true profanation, lamentable construction, etc. These are just a few of the statements made about"Lady Rosa of Luxembourg" by the Croatian artist Sanja Iveković. The work is an appropriation of theGëlle Fra, a memorial to the soldiers who died for Luxembourg and one of the Grand Duchy's most iconic monuments. The sculpture, representing a pregnant woman, and its base were installed near the Place de la Constitution in spring 2001 as part ofthe"Luxembourg, les Luxembourgeois" exhibition of theCasino Luxembourg– Forum d'art contemporain.
Thirty patriotic and Resistance associations joined forces with opponents of the "Gëlle Fra 2".Together, they collected 5,000 signatures.They also protested against this "misrepresentation" of their iconic monumentand drew attention to the sacrifices of the local fighters who lost their lives fighting for freedom.Some people called for the Minister for Culture to resign.
However, the artist never intended to hurt the feelings of Luxembourgers. She merely wanted todraw attention to the problems faced by women in war, crises and conflict.At the same time,she sought to question the image, condition and status of women in society. As such, it pays tribute to the bereaved, the women who were raped and the victims of war, but also to those who honour the heroes (such asGëlle Fra), mothers, prostitutes and many others, as shown by the inscriptions on the base.
The highly controversial discussions surrounding the Lady Rosa were significant and underlined the various interpretations and values of a historic monument and contemporary art.In 2011, Lady Rosa was exhibited in New York at theMoMa(Museum of Modern Art) as part of aretrospectiveon the artist. In 2021, aplayentitled "Moi, je suis Rosa!" gave her the chance to speak again. Today, the artwork is housed in the reserves of the Mudam Luxembourg.
All is art
In 2007, the Grand Duchy and the Greater Region was the European capital of culture. This time,it was the Belgian artistWim Delvoyewho caused a stirin the press and popular culturewith his work of artCloaca. The"Wim Delvoye: Cloaca 2000 – 2007" exhibition was organised by the Casino Luxembourg in collaboration with the Mudam Luxembourg. Themonographwas entirely devoted to the Cloaca project and, for the first time,brought together the eight machines created so far, as well as original drawings, 3D photographs, X-rays, models and other objects. Also, for the first time, thethree Cloaca were in operation at the same time:two were active at the Casino for almost the entire duration of the exhibition and one for three days (for the Night of the Museums 2007) at the Mudam.For the artist, his machines fulfil one of mankind's dreams:to reproduce the digestive functions of the human body.For some visitors, however, the exhibit represented a nightmare.
Excrement smells.  Nevertheless, in the eyes of biologists, it proved to be an interesting reproduction of our digestive system.  Eight restaurateurs from Luxembourg city "fed" the machines at the Forum d'art contemporain and a supermarket supplied unsold food for the "Super Cloaca" at the Mudam Luxembourg.The artist was aware that the public would not find this practice "politically correct", but he was in fact toying with these emotions.
Cloaca produces "excrement" and the artist sells "excrement" (vacuum-packed as a product with artistic value).  Artistically, this concept is not new. Piero Manzoni had sold tins of "Merda d'artista" in 1961, but the message remains the same today: we live in a consumer society where you can sell anything at any price, even "excrement".
Wim Delvoye is anentrepreneurial artist with a fervent commercial sense. But he also has a taste for theabsurd and mockery in the tradition of Belgian surrealist artists.While its critics argue that it is in bad taste, enthusiasts see it as a celebration of humour and art.
This is not a provocation
On 29 October 2014 (Ascension Day) the French-Luxembourgish-Italian artist Deborah de Robertis exposed her genitals in front of Gustave Courbet's painting "The Origin of the World", which is part of the collection of theMusée d'Orsayin Paris.The artist was wearing a golden dress, her face was made up with golden tears and the performance was accompanied by the soundtrack of Franz Schubert's "Ave Maria" and her recorded voice.A handful of visitors clapped, but in general the performance caused a mixture of panic and excitement, and even led to a confrontation with the police.Despite spending a few hours in custody and receiving a caution, Deborah de Robertis was soon released. As a result of this performance, she became an overnight celebrity, creating a buzz in the international media.
Editor's note: the photo above does not represent theworkthat caused a scandal at theMusée d'Orsay. It has also been edited.
For the artist, it was not a question of provocation, but of redirecting attention. By exposing her genitalia, she also wanted to confront the viewer with his gaze. Through this workshe aimed to question the position of women as models in the history of the arts, the naked female body as an active subject rather than an object of the male gaze, and the position that an artist can freely take.At present, sex is everywhere and easily accessible to everyone via the internet, but when you move it into the world of art, the rationale changes. For Deborah de Robertis, nudity is a form of protest and a tool for critical reflection, which challenges the systems of patriarchy in the artistic world.
The artist continues to showcase her performance art and political artwork. She lives in Paris, Brussels and Luxembourg.
Last update16.01.2026
For more information
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
Luxembourg at the Venice Biennale
A tour of Luxembourg museums
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/cnci-friches-industrie-creative-tiers-lieux-luxembourg.html
Third places and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (II)
An wasteland is a piece of land previously used for industrial purposes that has since been abandoned. The rehabilitation of these sites will enhance the heritage for both the region and the population. Today, industrial wastelands are often transformed by local authorities into places dedicated to creative projects and to promoting community life. In this way, culture is embedded in the region and they become important places of social and cultural cohesion. In this article we present the National Centre for Industrial Culture, which works to preserve and enhance this heritage.
Industrial culture on the agenda
In 2004, an initial concept for a national centre for industrial culture was presented, and in 2009 a government bill was approved. However, due to the financial situation, implementation was postponed until 2010. In 2017, the working groupEise'Stolwas set up as part of the application by the southern region,Minettfor the Unesco's "Man and the Biosphere" programme. The group continued its activities beyond the application and in 2019 became the non-profit organisationIndustriekultur-CNCI. Following the update of the CNCI concept, the signing of the agreement with the Ministry of Culture and implementation finally took place in 2020.
Since then, the non-profit organisationIK-CNCI(Industriekultur-Centre national de la culture industrielle) is now responsible for:
The IK-CNCI aims to become a reference and research centre for industrial heritage with a national and international cooperation network. As part of its tasks, the team coordinates and participates in various projects such as the "MinettMash-Up", the possible upgrading and reuse of theGebléishal(blower hall) in Esch-Belval or the preservation and renovation of the formerMetzeschmelzsteelworks in Esch-Schifflange.
3 questions to Marlène Kreins, Chair of theIndustriekultur– CNCI
1) What is the importance of third places for the rehabilitation or reuse of former industrial sites?
The current activities of the associationIndustriekultur-CNCI focus not only on the preservation of historic industrial buildings, the so-called third places, but also on the development of new reallocation concepts to reuse these former classified buildings in an innovative and creative way. The iron cathedrals are witnesses to the history of the steel industry and factory work. They tell us about the social struggles and the social upheavals that have changed a whole society. They illustrate the economic transformation of a formerly rural area. They are symbols of the changes brought about by mining and the steel industry in the Minette Basin. They remind us of customs and traditions that still shape our lives today. As third places have always been full of life, it is our mission to revive these places through appropriate conversion, so that they do not end up as mere stone piles or monuments.
2. What are the current projects of the association?
The CNCI is currently involved in the creation and development of a network of museum institutions committed to the enhancement of the industrial heritage in Luxembourg. Today, the network comprises 17 partners whose aim is to create a national centre for industrial heritage.
The CNCI develops conversion concepts. In this context, it works on several projects and supports various initiatives in collaboration with the relevant actors and institutions (Blower Hall in Esch-Belval,Metzeschmelzin Esch-Schifflange, Dommeldange,Roud Lënsin Esch, chimneys on the Belval site, etc.). We are also committed to raising awareness of the values of industrial heritage through education and conferences.
3. Which is your favourite among the reused industrial sites?
It is difficult to name just one. But for me, the VEWA site in Dudelange and the FerroForum in Esch-Schifflange are very good examples of successful conversion with public participation. They show that utopias are possible.
In a second article, we will presentexamples ofthird placesin Luxembourg.
Last update31.03.2025
For more information
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
From graffiti to street art in Luxembourg
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/luxembourg-biennale-venice.html
Luxembourg at the Venice Biennale
Since 1988, Luxembourg has been a regular participant at "La Biennale di Venezia". Every two years, alternating with the Architecture Biennale, an artist represents the Grand Duchy at this major international contemporary art event. In 2003, Luxembourg won the Golden Lion for the best pavilion and since 2019, the Luxembourg pavilion has been located in the historic setting of the Sale d'Armi in the Arsenale. In this article, we will retrace the roots of this Venetian adventure by showcasing the projects that have left a mark on our hearts and minds.
TheVenice Biennalewas founded in1893to nurture economic development and cultivate tourism in the Italian city. At the Biennale, art is showcased by individual nations, which makes it different from all other biennales.However, Luxembourg's introduction to this prestigious event did not go smoothly. Following its initial participation in1956, the Grand Duchy did not take part in the Venice Biennale for many decades. It continued toexhibit at theSão Paulo Biennalefor many years. From 1953 until 1972, the works of Luxembourg artists regularly crossed the Atlantic. However, the presence of the Grand Duchy at this Biennial was called into question due to the decreasing resonance and the increasingly high transport costs. In 1988, Luxembourg returned to Venice and a new adventure began.
Luxembourg's first trip to Venice
In 1956, Luxembourg shows the painter Joseph Kutter and the sculptor Auguste Trémont for the first time at the Venice Biennale, under the curation of Joseph-Émile Muller, head of the aesthetic education department at the State Museums.The exhibitiontook place in an area allocated to the Italia pavilion and showcased fifteen paintings and seven sculptures. The main aim was toshine a spotlight on Luxembourgish artists abroad.
From 1958 onwards, Luxembourg did not receive an invitation to take part at the Biennaledue to the lack of available space. Venice's loss turned into São Paulo's gain as the Grand Duchy continued to send the artistic works created by its visual artists to the Biennial in Brazil. Joseph Kutter participated posthumously in 1953 with a small retrospective of seven paintings.
Joseph Kutter (1894-1941) is widely regarded asone of the most influential painters in Luxembourg. Influenced by impressionism, he developed his own rather expressionist style of painting, which can be seen in his portraits, landscapes and still lifes.
Auguste Trémont (1892-1980) was a Luxembourgish sculptor and painter. He trained at theNational School of Decorative Arts in Paris, and is best known for hisanimal sculpturesand major public commissions.
Back to the Biennale
Thirty years afterLuxembourg's initial participation,and driven by the artist Patricia Lippert, the Ministry of Cultural Affairs once again decided to rise to the challenge and embrace the artistic experience of Venice.
In 1988, Luxembourg showcased, on a modest scale, two national artists in an exhibition area of 20m2 in the Italia pavilion.Visitors were able tomull over five gouaches and three sculptures byMoritz Neyandtwo paintings byPatricia Lippert, including a diptych that was split in two due to lack of space!
Moritz Ney's gouaches illustrate emotional imagery, while the sculptures are unfinished wooden heads, roughly cut with an axe and then coloured. Patricia Lippert evokes a personal mythology by blending her abstract strokes with figurative expressionism in dark, brooding colours.
Interview with Patricia Lippert on the exhibition at the Venice Biennale (© Mudam) (Video/Audio YouTube)
Patricia Lippert, was born in 1956. She lives and works in Luxembourg and Berlin. She is a painter and sculptor. During her studies, she wrote a thesis on the following topic: "Gibt es eine weibliche Ästhetik? Vorschläge zu einer veränderten Kunstpraxis der Frauen." (Is there such a thing as a female aesthetic? Proposals for a change in women's artistic practice.).
Moritz Ney, artist-painter and sculptor, was born in 1947. Since 2019, he has lived and worked in Luxembourg and Belgium. His working techniques cover wood and stone sculptures, assemblages and engravings, silkscreen prints as well as painting.
An extraordinary exhibition pavilion
Since1988, the determination to showcase works of art in Venice has not waned. However, as the number of exhibitions and the exhibition spaces were small at the beginning, the artists were required to display works in smaller formats.
In 1995,the year of the centenary of the Biennale and the year that the Grand Duchy was awarded the European City of Culture for the first time,Luxembourg was the only country present in theGiardinithat did not have a fixed pavilion!
"Potemkin Lock" byBert Theisis an artistic project which was born out of a difficult situation which, to date, has no equivalent. For this edition, the general curator of the Biennale decided to occupy the Italia pavilion entirely with the international exhibition and throw out all countries without a national pavilion. With rents for other spaces exceeding the allocated budget and requests for other alternatives being turned down,the artist finally decided to use a plot of scrubland in the Giardini located between the Belgian and Dutch pavilions. Access to the area proved difficult and the changing rooms and toilets for the Biennale staff were situated behind the site. Despite these obstacles,the Luxembourg pavilion - a temporary installation - was finally completed mainly because neither the Biennale nor the Belgian or Dutch officials raised any objections.
Bert Theis' artistic project was animmediate success. No other Luxembourg project has received such acclaim in the international press and the artist was subsequently invited to participate in other major events.
"Potemkin Lock" is a"practicable sculpture". Visitors, upon accessing the installation, enteredacourtyard garden in the Giardiniand were immediately immersed into the artistic project as active participants. Throughout the exhibit, the visitor was greeted by a rap song, consisting of lyrics from an interview with the Dadaist artist Marcel Duchamp, with music by Ralph Rippinger.
Bert Theis was born in 1952 in Luxembourg and died in 2016. He lived and worked in Milan. He is best known forhis large urban installations, public platforms and pavilions in public parks.
Golden Lion for Luxembourg
In1999, the Luxembourg pavilion founda new homeand welcomed visitors on the ground floor of thela Ca' del Duca along the Canal Grande. It was here that history was made!
In 2003, Su-Mei Tse was awarded the Golden Lion for her work "Air Conditioned" (voted best national pavilion). The Golden Lion is considered as the "Oscar" of the art world, and was awardedfor the first time to a pavilion outside the Giardini!The prize not only rewarded the artistic work, but also the endeavours of the organising team of theMudam Luxembourg–Le Musée d'Art Contemporain du Luxembourg, as well as the work undertaken by Luxembourg over the past 15 years to make a breakthrough at the Biennial.
The young artist showcased a broad range of works at the Ca' Del Duca:two films, sculptures, a neon light and an anechoic chamber.They cast a peculiar atmosphere over the pavilion where time seemed to flow at a different speed. Music, noise and silence transformed the space into alandscape of sound, taking the visitor on apoetic journeythrough the exhibit.The exhibition raised questions about human destiny.
The project, which led to long lines of visitors and enjoyed international press coverage, had a major impact on Su-Mei Tse's successful career. She was born in 1973 in Luxembourg and is educated in visual arts and music. She lives and works in Berlin and Luxembourg.
Interview with Su-Mei Tse on the exhibiton at the Venice Biennale (© Mudam) (Video/Audio YouTube)
In2001, for the first time, theMudam Luxembourgwas entrusted by the Ministry of Culture toorganise the pavilion. From2007onwards, the museum has shared this taskalternately with theCasino Luxembourg–Forum d'art contemporain.Since2010, the curator of the exhibition is no longer appointed by the Ministry. Instead,a call for projects is launched to select the artist and the curator.In 2017, the Luxembourg government signed a contract with the Fondazione La Biennale di Venezia that guaranteedLuxembourg's participation in the stunning Sale d'Armi for the next 20 years. Thus, for the 58th edition of the Biennale in2019the Luxembourg pavilion said goodbye to the Ca' Del Duca and moved to its new artistic residence.
Did you know?
The first edition of the Venice Biennale took place in 1895. It was called the International Art Exhibition of the City of Venice and took place in the public gardens, the Giardini di Castello, located south of the Arsenale.At the beginning, there was just one pavilion. But, as the artistic event developed over the subsequent years, countries began to build their own exhibition areas. The Venice Biennale is constantly reinventing itself and aims to broaden its horizon beyond the visual arts.As early as 1930, special sections for music, theatre and cinema(the famous Mostra) were created and, from1980onwards, there was also an event dedicated toarchitecture.
Last update29.11.2024
For more information
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
Art and craft trades
Andrea Mancini and the design collective Every Island exhibit at the Venice Biennale
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/andrea-mancini-every-island-biennale-venice-exhibition.html
Andrea Mancini and the design collective Every Island exhibit at the Venice Biennale
Luxembourg has regularly participated in La Biennale di Venezia since 1988. Every two years, alternating with the Architecture Biennale, an artist represents the Grand Duchy at this large-scale international contemporary art event. Since 2019, the Luxembourg pavilion has been located within the historic spaces of Sale d'Armi, at the Arsenale. 2024 a unique collaboration between Andrea Mancini and Every Island is on display.
A space for production and experimentation
In 2024,the artist and musician Andrea Mancini and the design collective Every Island have created a space for production and experimentation at theLuxembourg Pavilionat the International Art Exhibition – La Biennale di Venezia. The theme chosen for the 60th edition of the Biennale is "Foreigners Everywhere", representing a call for tolerance and hospitality.
The result of the unprecedented collaboration between Andrea Mancini and Every Island, entitled "A Comparative Dialogue Act", combines visual art, music, performance and installation.It takes the form of an open "sound lab", where four young international artists are invited to create a soundscape in the form of a collage over the course of the Biennale, using a variety of research processes. In this acoustic library,experimental sounds, melodic structures, speech and voices will be assembled to become the "sound of the Biennale".
The music studio is integrated into the architecture of the pavilion; it is malleable and transformable and can be arranged and adjusted by the artists. The performances that take place there will also create opportunities for exchange with the public.
The four intervening artists are Spanish musician and performer Bella Báguena, Turkish artist Selin Davasse, Swedish artist Stina Fors and French transdisciplinary artist Célin Jiang. At the end of the exhibition,a vinyl record will be released comprising all the pieces produced by the artists.
Andrea Mancini, born in 1989, is a Luxembourgish musician and artist who lives and works in Brussels.His interdisciplinary practice explores the relationship between space, his subject and sound,usinga variety of techniques including installations, video and performance. His work has already been exhibited several times in Luxembourg, for example at theKulturfabrik– Cultural Centre in Esch-sur-Alzette, theRotondesandCasino Luxembourg– Forum d'art contemporain. He is also active in the electronic music scene and has released several records under the aliasCleveland.
Every Islandis a Belgian design collective based in Brussels. It was founded in 2021 byfive designers who explore performativity in spaces through ephemeral architecture and installations. They useambiguity as a design tool, and space becomes a scenographyof transition and meaning. They have already completed projects in Leuven, Brussels, Rimini and also atMudam Luxembourg– The Contemporary Art Museum of Luxembourg.
A brief history (of art)
Luxembourg's first steps at theVenice Biennalewere difficult– unfortunately its first participation in1956initially remained a one-off... It was only thirty years later, in 1988, at the initiative of the artistPatricia Lippert, that the Ministry of Culture made a further attemptto participate in the prestigious artistic event. Since then it has never looked back.
In2017, the Luxembourg government signed a contract with the Fondazione La Biennale di Venezia that guaranteedLuxembourg's participation in the stunning Sale d'Armi for the next 20 years.
Exhibitions are organisedalternately by Mudam – The Contemporary Art Museum of Luxembourg and Casino Luxembourg – Forum d'art contemporain. Kultur | lx, in collaboration with the Ministry of Culture, has launched the latest call for projects to select the artist and the curator for this year's edition of the Biennale.
List of participating artists
1956 / Joseph Kutter and Auguste Trémont
1988 /Patricia LippertandMoritz Ney
1990 / Marie-Paule Feiereisen
1993 / Jean-Marie Biwer and Bertrand Ney
1995 /Bert Theis
1997 /Luc Wolff
1999 /Simone Decker
2001 /Doris Drescher
2003 / Su-Mei Tse
2005 / Antoine Prum
2007 / Jill Mercedes
2009 /Gast Bouschet & Nadine Hilbert
2011 /Martine Feipel & Jean Bechameil
2013 /Catherine Lorent
2015 /Filip Markiewicz
2017 /Mike Bourscheid
2019 /Marco Godinho
2022 / Tina Gillen
2024 /Andrea ManciniandEvery Island
Last update10.11.2025
For more information
Luxembourg at the Venice Biennale
Top 5: artistic creations and initiatives that have left their mark on contemporary art in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/award-film-movies-audiovisual-luxembourg.html
Lëtzebuerger Filmpräis
The 11th edition of theLëtzebuerger Filmpräistook place on 22 November 2025 at theGrand Théâtrein Luxembourg City. At the ceremony, prizes were awarded in 14 categories. Read on to discover this year's winners and find out more about the Luxembourg film awards.
A democratic voting system
TheLëtzebuerger Filmpräisrewards the best contributions to the Luxembourg film and audiovisual industryIt showcases outstanding works, fosters creativity in Luxembourg, promotes the development of the local film industry and draws the attention of a wider public to productions made in the Grand Duchy.
The jury votes by secret ballot in two rounds online.The jury is composed of the400 members of theFilmakademie, all of whom are professionals in the audiovisual and film industry in Luxembourg. During the first round of voting, up to five nominees are selected for each category. The winners are chosen in the second round of voting.
The "Best XR Work" category is the only one to be decided by a specialised international jury.
A special press prize, not awarded by the Académie, is presented by the Luxembourg Film Press Association. (ALPC).
The winners are presented with statuettes produced by the Luxembourg artistPatricia Lippert.
The 14 categories and the selected winners
Best Screenplay Award:
Eric Lamhène and Rae Lyn Lee for "Hors d'Haleine"
Award for Best Luxembourgish Feature Film, Animation or Documentary:
"Hors d'Haleine" by Eric Lamhène - produced bySamsa Film
Hors d'Haleine (Video/Audio YouTube)
Film trailer
Fox and Hare Save The Forest (Video/Audio YouTube)
Film trailer
Prize for Best Original Music:
André Dziezuk for "Fox and Hare Save the Forest"
Prize for Best Creative Contribution to an Animated Work:
Stéphane Lecocq (Design) for "STITCH HEAD"
Prize for Best Animated Co-Production Feature Film:
"STITCH HEAD" by Steve Hudson and Toby Genkel – co-produced byFabrique d’Images
STITCH HEAD (Video/Audio YouTube)
Film trailer
LÄIF A SÉIL (Video/Audio YouTube)
Film trailer
Prize for Best Creative Contribution to a Work of Fiction or Documentary:
Nikos Welter (director of photography) for "LÄIF A SÉIL"
Prize for Best Female Performance:
Sophie Mousel in "LÄIF A SÉIL"
Prize for Best Male Performance:
Timo Wagner in "LÄIF A SÉIL"
Special press prize:
"LÄIF A SÉIL" by Loïc Tanson - produced by Samsa Film
Prize for the Best Animated Series or Transmedia Production:
"DINO MITE" by Sandra Schiessl and Cherifa Bakhti - produced byFabrique d’Images
Prize for the Best fiction or documentary series or transmedia production:
"MARGINAL"by Loïc Tanson and Frédéric Zeimet - produced by Samsa Film
MARGINAL (Video/Audio YouTube)
Film trailer
Pize for the Best Feature Film, Animation or Documentary:
"LINDA, LINDA!" by Kiyan Agadjani - produced byRed Lion
Prize for Best Fiction or Documentary Co-Production Feature Film:
"ALL WE IMAGINE AS LIGHT" by Payal Kapadia - co-produced byLes Films Fauves
ALL WE IMAGINE IS LIGHT (Video/Audio YouTube)
Film trailer
Award for Best Immersive Work:
"CECI EST MON COEUR" by Nicolas Blies and Stéphane Hueber-Blies - produced bya_BAHN
Missing Pictures (Video/Audio YouTube)
11 editions already!
Thefirst editionof theLëtzebuerger Filmpräistook place in2003, under thejoint ventureof public authorities, the Association of Film Technicians (ALTA), the Association of Filmmakers and Scriptwriters (LARS), the Association of Actors and the Producers Association (ULPA). The biennial event was organised by theFilm Fund Luxembourguntil 2014. Since then,the Luxembourg film awards have been organised in collaborationwith theFilmakademie. The roles are clearly defined: theFilm Fundcoordinates the award ceremonyandthe academy organises the voting.
If you are a member of one of the founding associations, a stakeholder in the film or audiovisual industry, head of a cultural film institute, a specialist teacher, a film critic, a festival director or a cinema operator, you are eligible tojoin theFilmakademie.
Last update24.11.2025
For more information
Film Fund Luxembourg
Audiovisual production
World War II in Luxembourgish films
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/graffiti-urban-art-luxembourg.html
From graffiti to street art in Luxembourg
Graffiti is the art of writing one's name in as many styles as there are writers. Through their illustrations, graffiti artists create markers in the urban space. They showcase their artistic know-how and their works are contemporary representations of our past. The first graffiti appeared in Luxembourg in the 1980s and 1990s. Seen at the time as an act of rebellion, and often inspired by the hip-hop scene, this urban art which has left its marks across the country, has become mainstream today. The taggers are familiar and locations are specially earmarked for their work. We encourage to find out for yourself!
Do you remember the 1980s and 1990s? A time when everything was illegal!
Nameless and faceless. By definition, graffiti artists are not known as people, but by their names, which they paint on the walls. It is a language in itself, brimming with personalities and heritage...
In the 1980s,the first wave of hip-hopreached Europe, giving birth to the first graffiti artists in Luxembourg. Graffiti would pop up under bridges, in sheltered spots in the south of the country or in underground passages and on construction hoardings in Kirchberg. It was mainly the work of skaters or breakdancers, who were part of the rap scene. They would leave their mark without actually having a genuine "label". During this time,everything was illegaland people did not see graffiti as cool "street art"; instead itwas considered as a form of pollution pointlessly defacing clean walls.
After this initial movement died down,a second wave emerged in the 1990s. In 1995, an educator decided to oppose the common trend and support a group of young people who were spray-painting the walls of the youth centre where he worked. He set up the"first large wall"for them on "rue de Strasbourg", where they could paint their graffiti. These youngsters are still active today:SUMO!, Spike,Stick, Dan Sinnes (Electric Avenue Tattoo),Alain Tshinzaand many more.
With its roots still firmly entwined in the hip-hop scene,this event was the trigger for the Luxembourg graffiti sceneto gain its independence.
SUMO!
SUMO!
© SUMO!
© Claude Piscitelli, SUMO!
© Luxair, SUMO!
Spike
© Spike
© Spike
© Spike
© Stick
© Stick
© Stick
Graffiti breaks free from its underground status
Young artists were soon recognised by the general public. Graffiti began to break free from its underground status andthe idea of creating art simply for pure pleasure also becomes a sort of occupation. Commissions from theChamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts(Chambre des Métiers), "den Atelier" concert hall as well as shops such as "Planet X" help to raise the profile of the artists and their work. It also gives them the chance to buy or be paid in material to create their graffiti. An increase in the stock of material leads toan increase in production.
Luxembourg graffiti artists begin totravelto the four corners of the world andtake part in jams abroad. They find that graffiti is more established outside of Luxembourg andforge friendshipswith other artists in the Greater Region.The network growsfurther as a result of the artists studying abroad and through articles showcasing their work in international magazines as well as the first websites dedicated to street art;the movement eventually spreads its wings across the international arena.
Stick
Sader
© Sader
© Sader
© Sader
© Sader
Thomas Iser
© Thomas Iser
© Thomas Iser
© Thomas Iser
© Thomas Iser
© Thomas Iser
Nask
© Nask
© Nask
© Nask
© Nask
Capturing the urban landscape and conquering the terrain
When the city of Luxembourgopened theSkatepark, it made one wall available to the graffiti artist Stick and his friends from Brussels. Eager for more, during a second session,they broadened their palate and more or less appropriated the whole façade of the building!At the same time, other people began tagging the walls and adding pictures at various places across the site. In order to remove the graffiti once and for all, the city decided to paint all the walls white again.Before the renovation works, the city authorities nevertheless gave the graffiti artists free rein of the site. Lo and behold, to the surprise of the city, all the buildings were covered from floor to roof in paint in the space of a weekend!
With its desire to renovate the site somewhat weakened, the city's Sports Department, which had moved to theSchluechthaus, authorisedthe work of "accomplished" graffiti artists under two conditions: the site must be kept clean and tidy and artists must obtain a permit or an official registration from the reception of the Skatepark upon arrival on site.An interview with Xavier Bettel, who was an elected member of the Chamber of Deputies at the time, in the magazine Rendez-vous(currently known asCity magazine)finally gives his official seal of approval: in black and white, he declares that he is proud of this location "legally" dedicated to graffiti art!
At present, the situation is somewhat different:inner cities are brimming with urban art commissionsand art is widespread in public areas.Street art has become accessible to alland it has helped to open the doors even further to the world of graffiti.
A relatively small scene
Graffiti is a language, a means of expression. Its roots can be found in childhood and youth. The youth of today have grown up surrounded by the images of their predecessors and they use the images of their generation in their graffiti.
Stick
Joël Rollinger
© Joël Rollinger
© Joël Rollinger
© Joël Rollinger
© Joël Rollinger
Alain Welter
© Alain Welter
© Alain Welter
© Alain Welter
SUMO!
Open air galleries to explore throughout the country
Last update29.11.2024
For more information
Hip-hop in Luxembourg
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/concours-architecture-prix-luxembourg.html
Architecture competitions
Functionality and rigorous construction standards in perfect harmony with the landscape, demonstrating spatial virtuosity, preserving the heritage, playing a social role and embracing energy efficiency and digital prowess... these are just some of the criteria taken into consideration as part of the architecture competitions and awards. These awards recognise a major contribution in the field of construction, a specific project or a career achievement; they showcase the talents of architects, engineers, interior designers, landscape artists and public or private project owners, as well as celebrate the quality and originality of their projects.
The Luxembourg Architecture Award: reflecting the vitality and quality of contemporary creation in Luxembourg
TheLAA Luxembourg Architecture Awardis organised by theLuxembourg Center for Architecture(LUCA), in recognition of the achievements of architects, engineers, interior designers, landscape architects and urban planners. It celebratesthe quality of the built environmentand projects that bring about improvements to our surroundings.
Launched in 1995, eligible projects are presented to the public in a major exhibition at the headquarters of the architecture centre.  They can also be viewed onthe competition website, which not onlypromotes the quality of contemporary design in Luxembourg and around the worldbut also serves asan archive of local creativity and excellence.
The Luxembourg Center for Architecture (LUCA), a non-profit association, creates and shares knowledge about the history and current state of architecture in Luxembourg. It promotes the value of both local architectural projects and urban development as vital for civilisation and quality of life. LUCA is also a platform for dialogue and initiatives for the entire architectural community, and in this capacity, it organises conferences, debates, exhibitions, guided tours and the pavilion at the "Venice Biennale" International Architecture Exhibition. Publications, archives and a library provide additional information about the past and present of our built environment.
Bauhärepräis: recognising the project owners that are building Luxembourg
TheBauhärepräis(Project Owner's Prize), run by theOAI(theOrdre des architectes et des ingénieurs-conseils, an industry association for architects and consulting engineers), has been the flagship event for the construction industry since it was set up in 2000. The prize is awardedevery four years. The last edition took place in 2024 and once again rewardedprivate or public builderswho havedelivered high quality architecture, engineering, town and country planning and urban developmentthrough their meticulously designed and successful projects.
The prize highlights the crucial relationship of trust between client and designer in the nine competition categories (single-family homes and apartment buildings, interior refurbishments, buildings for commercial, administrative or educational purposes, engineering projects, land development and technical facilities), which represent the work of the five professions represented by the OAI (architects, consulting engineers, town and local planners, interior designers, and landscape architects and engineers).
The prize also promotes contributions to our shared living environment, inspires and motivates future project owners, highlights topics such as heritage and how we will live together in the future, and showcases local expertise. Each application is examined by a jury of professionals and stakeholders from political and cultural circles.
The OAI (Ordre des architectes et des ingénieurs-conseils) was set up in 1990 as anassociation for professionals in the fields of architecture and engineering. It represents some 714 design and consultancy firms and more than 5,000 people. In line with itsthree missions- legal, professional and cultural - the OAI promotes the work of its members at economic, social, cultural and artistic level, focusing above all on the creation of a sustainable, high-quality living environment. The OAI is a member of several international organisations, in whichit promotes the quality of Luxembourg's architecture. The OAI's members provide project owners with acomprehensive range of support servicesfor their projects, from planning to monitoring during construction. The fact that the organisation represents five related professions facilitates the provision of coordinated services throughout the process.
Venice Biennale: presence on the global stage
TheVenice Biennalehas been one of the world's most prestigious cultural events for the past 120 years. The first International Art Exhibition was held in Venice in 1895. At present, more than 500,000 visitors attend the art exhibitions. In the 1930s, new festivals were added for music, cinema, theatre, etc.The first International Architecture Exhibition took place in 1980.
Luxembourg is a major player in this prestigious celebration of architectural achievement. In 2018, after nearly two decades, the Luxembourg Pavilion moved from the Ca' del Duca, a former Venetian house on the banks of the Canale Grande, to the first floor of theSale d'Armi de l'Arsenale, a former production site of the Republic of Venice. The location isone of the two main venuesused for the event. It housespart of the official exhibition and several pavilions from other countries.
The architecture biennial takes place every two years. The 2025 edition is organised byKultur|lxin collaboration with LUCA - Centre d'architecture du Luxembourg andthe Ministry of Culture.
For this 19th International Architecture Exhibition, Luxembourg's contribution is entitled"Sonic Investigations". Mike Fritsch, Alice Loumeau and Valentin Bansac have developed this project around the acoustic practice of research into the Anthropocene. It offers a sensitive exploration of Luxembourg’s territory, which cuts across different environments, positions, and voices. By reactivating our tendency to listen, it offers a new prism for understanding the territory and our ecosystems.
You can visit the Luxembourg pavilion from 10 May to 23 November 2025.
Quick fact
Iconic projects in Luxembourg are nominated every two years forEuropean Union Prize for Contemporary Architecture- Mies Van der Rohe Award (EUmies Awards).
Last update12.05.2025
For more information
Prix maître d'ouvrage 2024
MOAI.lu
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/personnages-iconiques-fiction-luxembourgeoise.html
Top 5: iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction
This time around, our Top 5 series casts a light on five iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction. Comic books, detective novels and series, 2D and 3D animation and fables for children offer ideal opportunities to uncover the spirit of Luxembourg, which is sometimes unique and sometimes universal in its appeal.
Superjhemp, the super-anti-hero of Luxusbuerg
He draws his powers fromKachkéis, the Luxembourgish cheese, and flies with his hands in his pockets, "like a true Luxembourger". But who is this character? It could only be our super-anti-hero, Superjhemp! By day,Charel Kuddelis a civil servant leading a boring life. He works for the Ministry of Unsolved Affairs in Little Duchy of Luxusbuerg. By night, he becomesSuperjhemp, a caped crusader solving crimes and fighting villains.
This satirical character was created at the end of the 1980s, acomic bookcollaboration betweenRoger Leinerand the writerLucien Czuga. Even though the character is one of the most popular Luxembourgish works of fiction, the spark for the creators came from an actual event: a string of mysterious bombings which took place between 1984 and 1986, referred to as the "Bommeleeër affair". The comic bookDe Superjhemp géint de Bommeleeërwas published in1988. Subsequently, our dear super-anti-hero has appeared in 29 comic books and, in 2018, he became a star of thesilver screenwithSuperjhemp retörns. In the film, Charel Kuddel is in the midst of a mid-life crisis, but he tries to regain his superpowers to save Luxusbuerg from a cosmic catastrophe. The film was the highest grossing Luxembourgish film at the box office in the country's history!
It goes without saying that humour and self-mockery abound, but Superjhemp also casts a light on Luxembourg, VIPs and gives you the opportunity to practice Luxembourgish!
Superjhemp retörns - Bande annonce (Video/Audio YouTube)
Capitani, judicial police
Luc Capitaniis the latest newcomer to inspire the imagination of Luxembourgers. Apolicemanwho is demanding and grumpy in equal measure, he is in charge of the case of the murder of a teenage girl and the disappearance of her twin sister in Manscheid, a small village in northern Luxembourg. Originating from the mining region in the south of the country, he struggles to adapt to the mentality of the inhabitants. Therefore, in the course of the investigation, Luc Capitani must not only track down a murderer, but also challenge the system in which many people are manipulated for the "common good”: nothing is what it seems and each inhabitant seems to know more than they are willing to reveal.
Where does this authoritarian character come from? A man with a hint of arrogance, who does not make things easy for anyone around him; no-one escapes his moods, not the suspects, his colleagues or the audience... He is the hero of thefirst police series to be filmed in Luxembourgish,Capitani. This is a classic crime thriller; each episode lasts about 30 minutes and it plays on the clichés and prejudices that Luxembourgers have about themselves.
Season 1of the series was broadcast on RTL in the autumn of 2019, but its real success came when it was shown on Netflix inFebruary 2021. It is in thetop 10 of series with the highest viewing figures in 49 different countries! The actorLuc Schiltz, who plays the role of Capitani, has appeared on television screens around the world.
It was so successful that asecond seasonwas filmed from March to June 2021 and has beenbroadcast on RTL since 22 February 2022.Capitaniwill also be rebroadcast on the Netflix platform. What does the series have in store for us in this new season? Luc Capitani is released from prison after three years on the condition that he secretly infiltrates the nightlife of Luxembourg's Gare district. To be continued!
Capitani - Bande annonce (Video/Audio YouTube)
D'Maus Ketti, the gentle country mouse learns a lesson
Written by Auguste Liesch andpublished in 1936,Maus Kettiremains one of the most popular stories in Luxembourgish literature. Ketti, a friendly mouse from the south of the country, welcomes her rather snobbish cousin Mim, who lives in Clausen, in the capital. Unhappy with the food served to her, Mim invites Ketti (her cousin from the country) to the city to show her all the fancy delicacies that she keeps talking about. In the city, the two mice break into a house and feast upon the food laid out on a beautifully set table. All of a sudden,Tunn the cat appears and tries to catch the two mice...
Based on a fable by the Greek poet Aesop, this story casts a light on the difference between life in the country and in the city, and the lessons to be learned from it. The story was taught in variousprimary schoolsin Luxembourg and continues to be used inLuxembourgish language courses!
The mouse is so popular in Luxembourg that a sculpture has been erected in her honour in the municipality of Burmerange, and another sculpture stands proud in a fountain in Mondorf-les-Bains.
Maus Ketti - Reading (Video/Audio YouTube)
Mr Hublot, a recluse... and an Oscar winner
He wears large thick lens glasses and has an odometer-like counter in his forehead which displays figures. It'sMr Hublot, the iconic character from the film of the same title which in2014won the Oscar for BestAnimated Short Film.
Mr. Hublot lives in a bizarre world, where partially mechanic, patched and sewn characters rub shoulders with huge vehicles, a world where the gigantism of mechanics and the determination to recover reign supreme. Obsessive compulsive, afraid of the outside world and withdrawn into himself, Mr. Hublot detests change and the unexpected. Luckily, he has also found a very effective way to combat his idiosyncrasies: he never leaves his home! The arrival of Robot Pet, a dog, turns his life upside down and he is forced to share his home with this very invasive companion.
This short film was entirely produced and made in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg by producerLaurent Witz(Zeilt Productions) in co-production withAlexander Espigares, a former 'BTS' (vocational training certificate) student at the secondary school Lycée Technique des Arts et Métiers de la ville de Luxembourg. The film features the characters of Belgian sculptorStéphane Halleux, whose visual world based on recycled materials had seduced Laurent Witz a few years earlier. This animated short film was produced in 2D and 3D and took three years to complete.
Mr Hublot - Bande annonce (Video/Audio YouTube)
Xavier Kieffer, chef and detective
Xavier Kiefferis a formerMichelin-starred chefwho now runs a small restaurant in Luxembourg. When a Parisian food critic suddenly collapses in his restaurant, the chef is suspected of murder and he immediately takes care of the situation: the buddingamateur detectivetakes the investigation into his own hands. No need to panic... Xavier Kieffer is in fact thehero of the crime novelsbyTom Hillenbrandwhich take place in the Grand Duchy and its surroundings.
The first novel in the series,Teufelsfrucht(The Devil's Fruit), was published in2011. This book was followed by six other works:Rotes Gold(Red Gold),Letzte Ernte(The Last Harvest),Tödliche Oliven(Deadly Olives),Gefährliche Empfehlungen(Precarious Recommendations),Bittere Schokolade(Bitter Chocolate), andGoldenes Gift.
Tom Hillenbrand is an economic journalist. An internship at the European Parliament in 1997 afforded him the opportunity to discover Luxembourg and its culinary delights. He is a passionate cook, a pastime which he practises regularly; his first Luxembourg culinary experience was at a market where he sampledGromperekichelcher(potato cakes) for the first time. However, the Luxembourg specialty which truly left its mark on his taste buds wasHuesenziwwi(hare stew).
Don't miss this series of gastronomic and detective novels, it's a chance to explore Luxembourg and savour its gastronomy!
Last update19.08.2025
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/hip-hop-music-luxembourg.html
Hip-hop in Luxembourg
Hip-hop expresses itself through graffiti, tags, dance and music. It first began to bloom in the United States in the 1980s and spread its roots to Luxembourg's urban culture from the early 1990s. It’s impossible to showcase all aspects of this musical genre in one article - rapping, DJ-ing, breakdancing, graffiti, beatboxing, etc. Instead, we decided to take a look back at its history and compile a playlist of local hip (hop) artists currently dominating the domestic music scene!
Hip scene
Hip-hop music and culture kicked-off atthe end of the 1980s, albeit tentatively, in the Grand Duchy. However, the movement began to grow radically at thestart of the 1990swiththe appearance of rap nightsandthe birth of local groups; around the same timeRadio ARAbegan to broadcast a newhip-hop show.At the end of the 1990s,"battles"(musical duels) were "fought" in bars in the city centre. These events took place in all the spoken and rapping languages of Luxembourg. The lyrics were different but the level of passion was the same!
In2003, thefirst hip-hop track in Luxembourgish was played on the radio. It was called "Firwat" and performed by the group "The Gentles", which was part of theSécurité Routière(Road Safety)advertising campaign. In2010, Alain Tshinza, one of the first godfathers of the rap scene "made in Luxembourg" releasedthe documentary Hamilius: Hip Hop Culture in Luxembourg. Thefilmcast a light onthree generations of hip-hopin Luxembourg (1980s, 1990s and 2000s), as well as theirmajor disciplines,dance, graffiti, DJ-ing and rap. At the same time, the moviepaid homage to the former Hamilius centre, the epicentre of the movement at the time withbreakdancesessions andgraffition display in the underground passageway.
The year of culture in2007had a major influence and helped todevelop the hip-hop scene. Today rap, with its undertones of social protest and critique of everyday life, is a popular form of music in the Grand Duchy. Lots of new artists have emerged, developing their unique styles, with varying degrees of success. Language diversity is still evident, butthe majorityof local rappers performin Luxembourgish, including the most famous ones. Follow the rhythm and listen for yourself!
De Läb, De Läbdance, 2011 (Video/Audio YouTube)
De Läb
De Läbis a hip-hop group from thesouth of the country. They performin Luxembourgishand take their inspiration from Conscious Rap and the Boom Bap sound, which they mix with vinyl records from the 1960s and 1970s (jazz, funk, soul, etc.); they deliver their social critique with irony and sarcasm. De Läb wasfounded in 2006by three youngsters, Corbi (rap and beats), David Fluit (rap, beats and scratches) and Spenko (beats and scratches), who has since quit the band. More recently, the group has added a DJ and other musicians to their ranks (bass, percussion, saxophone, piano).
Corbialso performs as asolo artist. "De Gëllene Stull", his first solo album, was released in 2015.
Turnup Tun, POGO (feat. Southboy), 2019 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Turnup Tun
Tun Tonnar, aka Turnup Tun, is a Luxembourgishproducer,singer-songwriter,musicianandrapper. He has worked with various artists, such as Tommek, Bandana, Skinny J and Don Piano, to name a few. He is amember of the groupRäpzodiand thecollectiveStayfou. In his singles, albums and EPs, he expresses himself in Luxembourgish and deliverssocially charged hip-hop.
Nicool
Thefirst albumby Nicool "Den Ufank vum N" was released in2019. The hip-hop artist has loved this musical genre since she was a youngster. Following a concert in 2016 byR.A. the Rugged Man, she began to write songs. She pens her lyrics inLuxembourgish, her mother tongue. Her style is brimming withhumourand she pays particular attention tothe rhyme.
Nicool, Stolz (beat by BTM & Slunnes), 2020 (Video/Audio YouTube)
MAZ
Thomas Faber, better known as the artist MAZ, won theScreaming Fields Festivalcontest organised by Rocklab in 2017. In2018, he released hisfirst albumand in2019he wasthe opening act for Nicki Minajat the Rockhal. He started rapping at the tender age of 15 but kept his passion a secret before performing for his friends a few years later. Today, he isan eminent representative of the Luxembourg rap and hip-hop sceneand plays at major festivals and concert hallsacross Europe.
MAZ, Start (prod. by Cehashi), 2018 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Brooze, ADEM (prod. by demn!), 2020 (Video/Audio YouTube)
(Bazooka) Brooze
Tough but charming!Bruce Biren, aka Bazooka Brooze, comes from Esch-sur-Alzette. He currently resides in Berlin where hestudies sound engineering. At the age of 16, he met Dschingiz Khan, a young Luxembourgish rapper, who not only inspired him to make music but also became his mentor. In2020, he released hisfirst album"Iwert dem Gesetz", showcasing songs about money and drugs. His lyrics are similar in style to Gangsta Rap, however they do not glamorise drug use, instead they cast a light on the real situation while also underlining the negative aspects.
Maale Gars, Maach Deng Zeen (feat. Rod), 2021 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Maale Gars
His musicblends rap and pop. His writes his lyrics inLuxembourgish; they are honest and often describe therelationship between friends and partners. At present, he has released four songs on his YouTube channel, as well as his album"Du weess"which contains seven tracks. For the song"Alles versicht", he collaborated withTurnup Tun. A full-time teacher by profession, the rapper is looking forward toperforming liveandto collaborating in the near futurewith other artists from the rap scene.
Maka MC
Maka MC is a rapper ofPortuguese originwho has sung in Luxembourgish since the age of 12. His pseudonym is an acronym"Maachen alles krass anescht"(I do everything openly, in a different way). In 2012, he began to collaborate withDavid Fluit(De Läb) and a year later released hisfirst EP"Maachen kengem Onrecht" (I cause no pain) on Fluit's"De Läbbel"record label. Thefirst albumfollowed in2016, and thesecondcame out in2018. He sings about the trials and tribulations oflife, comparing it to an eternal building siteand, at the same time, payshomageto all the people who work on building sites - an ironic nod to his roots. In February2019, he released thesingle"Wat ass lass?"with Jacky Under on YouTube. Tune in!
Maka MC - Wat Ass lass?! (feat. Jacky Under), 2019 (Video/Audio YouTube)
T the Boss
In2019,T the Boss brought out hisfifth and latest album"De Papp" (the father). He blendssocial critiquewith a sense offun. His career began20 years ago, in 2001. Since then the way to make music has changed and the experience has evolved: from his first CD, which he burnt himself and printed the cover on his home computer, he now has more than 100 local concerts under his belt and has released numerous albums, EPs, singles and mixtapes. The latest producer he has worked with is atechno DJwho also dabbles in hip-hop; the different style is evident in therhythms, which aremore electronic. In his other life, Rafael Possing is a chef and the owner of a restaurant in the Pfaffenthal.
T the Boss, D'Rou virum Stuerm (prod. by DJ Scorpion), 2019 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Bandana, SQUAD, 2015 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Bandana
"SQUAD" ("squatter avec le gang") is the "scandalous song" of the Gangsta rapper Bandana from Esch-sur-Alzette. In autumn 2015,the filming of the video caused a sensationwhen the police arrived on the scene because the actors were hooded and armed. False alarm! The weapons were just film props! Nevertheless, the event led to Bandana receivingcountless views on YouTubeand, at the same time,a certain amount of notoriety. Since, he has released other tracks – check it out!
Tommek, Hasta La Vista (feat. Ragga & Turnup Tun), 2020 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Tommek
Tommek, Tom Mersch or Peter Punchline is aLuxembourgish rapperfrom Clervaux. He began rapping at theage of 11, initially in German, then from 16 years of age in his mother tongue. In2013he released hisfirst singleand in2015hisfirst album"Tëschent Humor a Wourécht" (Between Humour and Truth). In May2020hislatest album came outwith 16 tracks, dealing with issues such as family, solidarity, happiness amongst friends and what matters most at the end of life. Tommek is renowned for his extensive use ofword playandhumourin his lyrics, and while using this humour to tacklemore serious issues in society.
Have you heard of...
TheQwest Freestyle Challengeorganised by Rocklab and theRockhal? Thecompetitionaims tofoster creativityandopen the doorto youngsters passionate about hip-hop and communities, as well assupport budding artistsin Luxembourg.
The artists Culture the Kid, DaMensa et Mellow were the winners of the first challenge. Incollaboration with the producers Magestick, they recorded their freestyle as a complete track at the Rockhal studio. The video clip of "The Qwest - New World" is available onYouTube.
We can't wait to see and hear more!
Last update23.08.2024
For more information
Musical production
Concert halls: an overview
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/jazz-luxembourg-partie1.html
Jazz in Luxembourg (I)
The history of jazz in Luxembourg is a long process. Imported by American soldiers during the First World War, this very particular musical style quickly found its place in the Grand Duchy. Let's go and meet some of the talents who made jazz emerge in Luxembourg.
Jazz originated in the United States in theearly 20th century. With its origins inbluesandgospel, this style of music was soon associated with the legacy left by black slaves in the American cotton fields at the end of the 19th century. Despite this fact, thefirst recordingconsidered to be jazz music was made in 1917 by theOriginal Dixie Jazz Band.
Although the band recorded in Chicago, it is often said that the cradle of jazz is inNew Orleans. In any case, it was from here that the improvised sounds of jazz were exported to the whole world.
Luxembourg was quickly seduced by jazz, which was introduced by American soldiers during the 1914-1918 war. The first bands emerged with the Auguste Donnen/Emile Boeres Jazzband (1920), The Big Six (1926) and The Hot Boys Band (1928). Hotels (Alfa, Majestic, Pôle Nord, ...) andcabaretsbecame the Mecca of jazz in Luxembourg. Culturally speaking, this was the heyday ofjazz clubs. But, with time, jazz gave way to jazz-swing, a cheerful derivative again imported by the American army, this time in 1944, during the Second World War.
Afterthe 1950s, new trends emerged, in particular rock'n roll, a style of music with which jazz now had to compete. Carried by musicians such asJohnny Glesener, Johnny Horne, Camille Back, Johnny NimaxorJean Roderes, jazz finally succeeded in establishing itself in the Luxembourg music scene.
Later, this music with its different cultural mixes gained in popularity and seduced a large audience in the Grand Duchy. The jazzy scene is now more than ever in full swing. Several places dedicated to it were created: theWiltz jazz club(1959), theLuxembourg jazz club(1967) and in the 1970s, theMelusinain Clausen opened its doors. The big national and international names met there. Bob Scholer, Michel Pilz, Keith Jarrett, Charles Mingus and Chet Baker are just a few examples.
Want to meet Luxembourg's jazz artists? Thenmark your calendars for these three popular events:
Gast Waltzing - jazz-expert and legend
"I remember their concerts very well. I went to see them when I was still very young",Gast Waltzing recalls. If there is a name to be associated with Luxembourg jazz, it is undoubtedly his. He promoted and popularised jazz like no other in Luxembourg.
His first steps in jazz go back a long way, more precisely to his teenage years when he wrote compositions for his first jazz-rock bandAtmosphere(1972), with which he performed regularly in the 1980s at the bistro Artscène."After the end of Atmosphere, I created Park Café, then Largo in 1995. Today I manage theGast Waltzing Quintet,"he says in an interview.
His success is inseparable from his famoustrumpet, an instrument he literally discovered at a young age when he played in the Useldange brass band."I was six years old when I discovered this instrument in the brass band's cupboard. That's all there was to it. So I took it and I've been playing the trumpet ever since."
After studying music theory, he followed a classical course to theNational Conservatory. But it was during his studies at the Athénée that he fell into the pot of jazz when he played in the Bigband orthe Kolléisch brass band. He even gave his trumpet a new dimension by expanding his repertoire to the world of jazz."What inspires me is freedom, this organised anarchy,"he reveals, admitting that he also has a weakness for bands that wear blazers, such as Tower of Power, Earth Wind and Fire, Chicago or Blood Sweat and Tears.
'For me, jazz means life. Jazz is a philosophy, an attitude'
But it is mainly thanks to Gast Waltzing that the evolution of jazz in the Grand Duchy took off. In 1986 he founded the jazz department of theConservatoire de la Ville de Luxembourgand formed theOrchestre National de Jazz Luxembourg (ONJL). This was a godsend for the jazz scene, as the teaching of this musical discipline has now become more structured.
These initiatives are now bearing fruit. Jazz in Luxembourg has become more professional and a range of local musicians has emerged. And according to Gast Waltzing's equation, Luxembourg produces a lot of young talent in comparison with other countries and in relation to its population. And he also provides the proof."A year and a half ago, 400 candidates took part in the jazz course at the National Conservatory in Paris. Ten people were selected and among them were two Luxembourgers."
In view of thepositive evolutionof the jazz scene, he points out that it is difficult for young people to find their place in this constantly changing world. Many clubs have closed down and if you want to listen to jazz, you can only find it on specialised radio stations or on CD. Despite this, he remains optimistic about the development of jazz in the Grand Duchy:"We have a whole host of young talents, who also have the opportunity to go abroad to develop. But you have to show yourself. If you're in Arlon, you're not yet in Namur, let alone Brussels."
For the record ...
Gast Waltzing's passion has always been music. Not only has he worked in the world of jazz, but this mastodon of the Luxembourg musical universe is amulti-faceted talent:arranger, composer, conductor and trumpet player, depending on demand. On stage, he has performed with such greats as the Scorpions, Amy McDonald, Gregory Porter, Patrica Kass, Didier Lockwood and Andrea Scholl.
In 2004 he launched alabeldedicated entirely to local jazz talent, WPRJazz, which releases several CDs a year and has built up an international distribution network. In 2008 he was also appointedartistic directorof the Jazz section of the Echternach Festival.
Thanks to him, in 2016, for the first time, a Luxembourg production received theGrammy Awardfor Best World Music Album.
https://www.waltzingparke.com/
Last update23.08.2024
For more information
Jazz in Luxembourg (II)
Jazz in Luxembourg (III)
Musical production
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/jazz-luxembourg-partie2.html
Jazz in Luxembourg (II)
The history of jazz in Luxembourg is a long process. Imported by American soldiers during the First World War, this very particular musical style quickly found its place in the Grand Duchy. Let's go and meet some of the talents who made jazz emerge in Luxembourg.
Sascha Ley - intuitive and spontaneous
The German-Luxembourgish artist Sascha Ley is one of the key figures in the world of jazz in the Grand Duchy and even in the Greater Region.Singer and improviser, composer and actress, Sascha Ley is a multi-talented artist. The connection between her and music began at the age of two. She has played the flute, piano and saxophone, but it is mainly her voice that makes her stand out on the stage today. According to her,the voice is the identity of the persona."It is through the sound of the voice that one recognises the personality."
On stage, she likes to take unconventional paths, her approach strongly rooted in modern jazz with a mix of imaginary folklore, contemporary music and even free improvisation. She considers this technique to be a gift that she has developed and honed over the years."Over time I discovered the limits of harmony, a harmony I was trying to break. To notice that the point of view can change is exciting. What is perfect or imperfect is irrelevant."
Between classical performance and herexperimental sound travelswith extended vocal techniques and narration, she enhances her texts in a moving way as well as an intense evocative jazz atmosphere.
Since 2011, she has been making her way with the French double bass playerLaurent Payfert. The duo offers a unique project of exploring sound worlds, while combining composition with freeimprovisation. Equally experimental are her engagements as a guest of the German pianist and improviser Georg Ruby in his trioVillage Zone, as well as with the Franco-German collectiveLes Oniristesand other projects.
Sascha Ley's inspirations come from many directions. Big names like Abbey Lincoln and Fred Frith have certainly influenced her. But it was the world of John Zorn that opened the door to the world of contemporary jazz."He pushed the sounds of jazz into atonality. That had such an impact on me. And it was thanks to this music that I understood the connections between the themes and the improvisation of the musicians and their instruments."
'For me, jazz means going beyond borders'
As far as vocalists are concerned, it is above all the two musicians Jeanne Lee and Shelley Hirsch who have influenced her music."What made an impression on me was their personality, their power, their expression and the enormous soulfulness in their voices."
Sascha Ley is not worried about thefuture of jazz in the Grand Duchy, as the 2000s saw a new generation of jazz musicians emerge in Luxembourg."Jazz existed then and continues to exist. It will continue to exist because people are looking for this freedom. On the one hand, more and more talent is emerging, and on the other hand, the audience is growing. In short, the enthusiasm for jazz has grown,"says Sascha Ley, adding that jazz may never be dead.
At least not in Luxembourg, because jazz has found its place in the Grand Duchy and it is alove storythat has lasted for over a hundred years. Nevertheless, Sascha Ley would like to see the jazz scene develop further in the country. In this context, she stresses the importance of cultural education."It is bearing fruit, and thanks to it we are making progress in cultural history. And that's good, because we are no longer just a financial centre. Luxembourg also has other business cards."
For the record ...
Sascha Leystudiedin Saarbrücken, at the Jazz School in Amsterdam and at the Conservatoire de Luxembourg. She also studied at the Jazz India Vocal Institute in Mumbai, India, and attended masterclasses and workshops with Meredith Monk, Shelley Hirsch, Frank Köllges and others.
https://www.saschaley.com/
Pascal Schumacher - two-faced musician
Classical percussionistand jazzvibraphonist: Pascal Schumacher is a musician with many faces. This Luxembourg-born artist, performer and composer has made a name for himself in numerous collaborations. He has composed for film, theatre, dance, big bands and collaborates with Luxembourg musicians.
He has been immersed in music since his youth. It all started with concerts in thebrass band in Uebersyren, in which he played for many years. After his studies at the Athénée, he started to study percussion in Strasbourg where he discovered jazz. In Brussels he did a degree in jazz and then a master's degree in jazz in The Hague. Then his jazz career took off....
In 2002, Pascal Schumacher formed thequartetwith pianist Jef Neve, bassist Christophe Devisscher and drummer Teun Verbruggen. The group has released three albums:Change Of The Moon(2004),Personal Legend(2005), andSilbergrau(2007). He has surrounded himself with brilliant musicians such as Kenny Baron, Tineke Postma and Nils Landgren. It is especially with the talentedGuy Cabaythat Pascal Schumacher has emerged at the forefront of inspired jazz."For many years he was my teacher and I owe him almost everything,"he says of Cabay. But, looking to the future, he expresses his wish that he would once like to go on stage with the Norwegian trumpeterArve Henriksen."Sonically he moves me and inspires me enormously."
'For me, jazz is a philosophy of life'
Since the beginning of his musical career, Pascal Schumacher has built a unique relationship withhis instrument, an instrument that allows him to go beyond the circle of Luxembourgish and other musical spheres. His latestalbum SOL, which he recorded on vibraphone, reflects an intimate sound experience that vibrates with infinite colours. However, if he had not learned the vibraphone, this exceptional talent, who is always looking for the new, the unexpected, the unknown, would be playing the piano today, he confides in an interview.
In addition tohis classical sensuality, which has taken him to the world's greatest concert halls such as the Concertgebouw Amsterdam, the Konserthuset Stockholm, the Konzerthaus Wien and the Mozarteum Salzburg, Pascal Schumacher has another passion, or rather, another job.
Since 2001, he has been apart-time teacherat the Conservatoire de Luxembourg Ville and a musician. He teaches classical percussion and jazz vibraphone. From 2010 to 2014, he also taught in the jazz department at the Hochschule für Musik in Saarbrücken.
https://www.pascalschumacher.com/
Last update02.03.2023
Jazz in Luxembourg (I)
Jazz in Luxembourg (III)
Musical activities for young people
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/jazz-luxembourg-partie3.html
Jazz in Luxembourg (III)
The history of jazz in Luxembourg is a long process. Imported by American soldiers during the First World War, this very particular musical style quickly found its place in the Grand Duchy. Let's go and meet some of the talents who made jazz emerge in Luxembourg.
Ernie Hammes - trumpeter with a double life
One of Luxembourg's greatest jazzmen is undoubtedlytrumpeterErnie Hammes. With his own band mixing jazz withLatin sounds, he has become an ambassador of the post-bop movement throughout the world. He has played in prestigious clubs such as the Blue Note and Birdland in New York, Ronnie Scott's Club in London, the Basement in Sydney and at jazz festivals in Montreux, Den Haag and Toronto.
This authentic trumpet virtuoso has performed with countless other musical greats, including the Supremes, Paul Anka and orchestras such as the Duke Ellington Orchestra, the Brussels Jazz Orchestra, the BBC Wales Symphony Orchestra and, of course, the Orchestre Philharmonique du Luxembourg. With the Maynard Ferguson & Big Bop Nouveau he has performed as a soloist or lead trumpeter in more than 25 countries.
But why the trumpet? His parents didn't give him this passion, because they are not musicians at all, says Ernie Hammes. He discovered the instrument himself at an early age. At the age of eight he took music theory lessons and continued at theEsch Conservatoryuntil the age of 18 before studying jazz at the Hague Conservatory and the Manhattan School of Music.
'For me, jazz means the freedom to create something new'
The other musical activity that marks Ernie Hammes' career is that ofmilitary music. Since 1987 he has been the first trumpet in the Grand Ducal Military Band.
For Ernie Hammes, classical music and jazz are not compatible and he has always fought against it. That's why he started playing jazz at the age of 15."Doing classical music was not enough for me. I wanted to try everything, I wanted to play more. To have the freedom to improvise, to write lyrics or do something that isn't on a sheet of paper."
In 2019, Ernie Hammes set theGrand Duke's birthdayto music. EntitledRegiis ostium(Royal overture)for symphonic orchesté ra and choir, the four-minute composition was performed by the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra at the opening of the official National Dayceremony at the Philharmonie.
For the record ...
Ernie Hammes was born in 1968 and since launching his career has recordedseven albumsunder his own name and is featured on 40 other recordings of all genres.
His latestalbum Evolutionfeatures his own quartet with guests Philip Catherine on guitar and Wayne Escoffery on tenor saxophone. For this album he also wrote arrangements for a ten-piece string section.
https://www.facebook.com/erniehammesmusic/
Michel Reis - full-time pianist
Who would have thought it? It was his father, a jazz fan but not a musician, who started his music career. Michel Reis told us that his father made him listen to the first jazz records and that it was then that he developed a passion for this music.
In love with melodies and rhythms, the young pianist went tostudyin Boston, at the renowned Berklee College of Music and the New England Conservatory of Music.
But as time went by, it was not only his studies that took him abroad but above all his concerts that took him all over the world.
The pianist is usually well surrounded, whether in atrio or a quartet. With his acolytes Marc Demuth and Paul Wiltgen, Michel Reis forms theReis-Demuth-Wiltgen triangle, with the formation piano, bass, drums. The story, which began at a high school party in 1998, has soared in 2011. Praised from its first album in 2013, the talented trio is now one of the musical attractions in the Grand Duchy and beyond. It is even exported very well, as the band has many concert halls around the world jamming. The three musicians travel between Luxembourg and New York, and are often on tour on the Asian continent. Even the famous saxophonistJoshua Redman, with whom Michel Reis has collaborated as a soloist, has praised the Luxembourg group.
In recent years, Michel Reis has succeeded in putting his unique signature on the demanding world of jazz and has established himself as an internationally renowned artist. He hascollaboratedwith artists such as Vince Mendoza, Didier Lockwood, Richard Bona and many others. Since 2005 he has released ten albums and his latest, the eleventh album entitled Short Stories, is the second on the Italian label CAMJazz.
Michel Reis has performed on theinternational scenein the most important venues and festivals in the world such as the Blue Note Jazz Club, the Olympia in Paris, the Casa de Musica in Porto, the Panama Jazz Festival and the Montreux Jazz Festival.
https://michelreis.com/
Last update02.03.2023
Jazz in Luxembourg (I)
Jazz in Luxembourg (II)
Being a musician in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/production-music-luxembourg.html
Musical production
By definition, a music producer paves the way for artists to produce their recorded music. Generally speaking, the producer finances the production of the single or album and receives payment from its sale. Find out more about some of Luxembourg's music producers and learn about their profession, their success stories and the passion that drives them.
Magestick Records
In2013, David Veiga and André Neves posted theirinstrumental video on YouTube. It was produced for rappers to practice their vocal skills and to rehearse their lyrics.Today, the duo are the proud owners of agold disc in the United Stateswith more than50 million viewsand almost250,000 subscriberson YouTube! They sell instrumental tracks to rappers across the world. In2020, theproduction companySony/ATVMusic Publishingin Berlin discovered the Luxembourg duo and signed them up to the label.
The first album we produced was by the artistMC Bilalin Germany. The album was released in2018and rose to number three in the official charts in Germany and number one in the Hip Hop charts.
The golden disc(more than 500,000 albums sold) which we received this year for our participation in the album byNLE Choppain the United States.
We would love to work withDrake.
At the moment, we're focused onsetting up our own recording studiowhere we could invite local and international artists. We're currently working on projects withGerman artistssuch as Samra, Azet, Capital Bra, etc. We're also working on a project with the singerOndreaz; we produced his first single"No Baila"which generated more than a million views on digital platforms.
They can listen to our productions onYouTubeor on ourofficial websiteand they can follow us onInstagram.
Chris Vitorino
Chris (Christophe)Vitorino de Almeidais ayoung musical artist, who is recognised on the international scene but is relatively unknown in his native country. He is under contract as acomposer atUniversal Music Group, as an theartist "Chris Meid" atWarner Music Group, two global leaders in the music industry. His impressive journey beganwhen Chris was 18 years oldand decided to quit school to study music production inLisbonatthe ETIC, a school for creative industries. Later, he took an internship inNew Yorkand continued his studies inLondonat thePoint Blank Music School, the music production school, where he metFelix Jaehn. Chris works alone, as a micro-business, and would like to get more involved in educating young people in order to show them what is possible with a lot of commitment and passion.
Today, albums are no longer a priority for an artist or record label. Nevertheless, I often end up byproducing individual songs, such as"Ain't Nobody (Loves Me Better)"by Felix Jaehn or"Stimme"by EFF, which later appeared on an album. Therefore, on thealbum "I" by Felix Jaehnyou'll find nine songs - five of which were international hits - that I produced or co-wrote.
To be honest, my biggest success is to be able to live my dream! But, if you're referring to sales figures, I can have had a few major successes. In2015, I co-produced"Ain't Nobody (Loves Me Better)" by Felix Jaehn; it was a number one hit and my first global success. Thanks to that song, I received my first"Diamond Award"; it sold more than 1,000,000 copies in Germany. I also received myfirst"Gold Award"in America for the sale of 200,000 copies. The same year, I produced the song"Stimme"by EFF which became a number one hit in Germany. I was awarded aplatinum discfor sales of over 400,000 copies. In2018, I worked on two other tracks by Felix Jaehn,"Like A Riddle"and"Jennie", which topped the music charts in Germany. "Jennie" sold more than 200,000 copies, for which I received mysecond "Gold Award".
There are so many to choose from! But if anything was possible, I would definitely choose to share a studio withMichael Jackson, by far the most talented and most inspirational artist to have lived on this planet. Besides him, I would probably pickPharrell Williams,Dr. Dreor Rick Rubin, the famous American producer.
I can't really talk about it,it's very confidential. What I can say is that atthe end of the yearan album will be released for which I produced and co-wrote a large part of the music.
I'm currently working on mywebsitebut it's stilltoo early to share any more information!
Napoleon Gold
Antoine Honorez, theFrench producerwhogrew up in Luxembourgand who currentlylives and works between Brussels and the Grand Duchy, is known for hiselectronic musicwhich he produces with bewitching arrangements and by sampling low-pitched and warm voices coupled with catchy percussion. He has worked onremixes and collaboratedwith Sun Glitters and Monsoon Siren, was the support act for London Grammar, Glass Animals, Son Lux,SOHN, and has played at various festivals across Europe, such as the Liverpool Soundcity Festival, Nordik Impakt, Galapagai Festival, Rock A Field and many more.
I produced thefirst EP byBartleby Delicate, "Deadly Sadly Whatever", which was released in May 2021. In2019, I releasedmy first solo album"Sunset Motel"for theCinematic Music Grouplabel in New York. Since joining the Cinematic Music Group,I have worked with artistssuch as Haiva Ru, Anna Majidson, Madge, Jesus Honcho, PH Trigano, the Spanish artists Raquel & Kimberley Tell, as well as one of the most exciting rappers on the music scene at the moment, Jalen Santony, as well as the jazz pianistJerome Kleinand the singer DAVESTATEOFMIND.
A greatprofessional achievementand a hugepersonal experiencewas my collaboration withGrammy AwardwinnerT-Pain. I wrote a song for my first EP,"Heaven and Back", and he sang the vocals on the track.
That could change, but at the moment I love the music made bySteve Reich! I listen to it a lot; it's also a form of therapy.
As a musician, I've arranged asongwriting sessionwith one of the two members ofFauxRealat the beginning of July 2021. He's an old childhood friend, of American descent; he lives in the USA and England and we're working onmy next album. WithBartleby Delicate, we're cooperating on the production of the next album. We're currently in theresearch phase and we just started writing the songs. As such, the album will be released in about a year.
You can find me onInstagram,FacebookandYouTube.
G-Minor Records
Founded in2013, G-Minor Records offers acomprehensive service, including thedevelopmentof artists,as well as production,publishing,distributionandpromotion. The production company discovers, develops, markets and promotes a large number of artists, mainly in the field ofpop music.Joël Heyard(drummer, songwriter and producer) andAaron Baustert(sound engineer, songwriter and producer) are fully committed to helping musicians succeed in the Luxembourg and international music industry. They aim to achieve their goal through their passion, know-how and experience.
The first album I produced (Joël Heyard, editor's note) was the album by the groupFirst-H."Hey Momo"came out in1997. We enjoyed a lot of success with the group and, at the time, were eventhe support act for Bon Joviin Bettembourg. Our average age was17 years old!
One of our biggest successes was the song"Firwat"by the groupThe Gentlesin2003. It was released as part of anadvertising campaign onRoad Safetyand we werethe first Luxembourgish hip hop group to be played on the radio!You can still hear this music today on the radio waves in the Grand Duchy. Another major honour wasto receive the commission to compose and produce the official musical composition for the royal wedding of the heir to the Luxembourg throne, entitled"I'm in Love"withDeborah Lehnenand Christophe Strotz.
Michael Jackson
Currently, I (Joël Heyard, editor's note) am working ona new albumwhich will probably be released at some pointthis year. Myfirst solo album"Introspection" came out in2018. Also, I regularly releasesingleswithJeff Herras part of our project:The Gazmen.
On thewebsite,Facebook,TwitterandYouTube
Axwai a.s.b.l.
Founded in2013, theAxwaiassociation offerspersonal and collective workshops(from 12 years old)in beat-making and modern music production for young people in Luxembourg and the Greater Region.In this music studio, adolescents can learn about and exercise their love for the production of modern music, rap, singing and create rhythms withthe support and guidance of a skilled instructor. The objective is to offer themembersthe necessarysupportin the field of musical creation at Axwai Studio.
Last update11.03.2026
For more information
Concert halls: an overview
Musical activities for young people
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/prix-servais-luxembourg-literature.html
Anne-Marie Reuter wins the Servais prize
The Servais prize is one of the country’s most prestigious literary accolades. It is awarded to works published in the previous year in Luxembourg. In 2025, the literary prize was awarded to Anne-Marie Reuter for her first novel "M for Amnesia". In the novel, we journey into the world of Millie and Melissa, two women exploring their identity and the inexplicable bond they share.
A cross between a family saga and sci-fi novel
"M for Amnesia" explores the themes of memory loss and trauma. The story takes place against a backdrop of a world affected by climate change, social segregation and biopolitical control. It delves into a world where scientists, driven by ambition and undue reliance on technology, seek to improve the human condition by carrying out experiments on the body and mind. It tells the story of the fragmented and intentionally incomplete lives of two women, Millie and Melissa, who ask themselves whether they can truly trust their memories.
The jury praised the book for the relevance of its subject matter and admired the author's polished, clinical style and the way she tackles the ethical dilemmas facing humanity. Anne-Marie Reuter experiments with new narrative techniques to explain the unnarratable, giving context to the diffuse and grasping the unreliable, while drawing attention to the crucial role of language in self-definition.
Anne-Marie Reuter is the eighth woman to receive the Prix Servais. She is also the author of the collection of short stories "On the Edge" (2017) and the illustrated story "Blue" (2021). She also co-foundedBlack Fountain Press, Luxembourg's first publishing house dedicated to English-speaking writers. In 2017, she translated a series of texts by the Luxembourg poet Lambert Schlechter into English, published under the title "one day I will write a poem".
Three questions for Anne-Marie Reuter
What was your inspiration for the book?
I am fascinated by the brain, memory and how it works. What remains when memories fade? Can we rely upon our memories? Through these reflections, a character began to take shape in my mind: Millie, an elderly woman suffering from amnesia, who has no memory of her past life and yet she is haunted by overwhelming feelings of guilt. She's convinced that she has made a terrible mistake, perhaps even committed a crime, but she can't remember what it was. By researching trauma and advances in neuroscience, I decided to place the story of Millie and her search for her lost past in the near future. It was at the same time that I developed the second main character: Melissa is a young woman, a digital savage, who resigned from a high-tech company and turned her back on civilisation for a simpler life in commune.
What does the prize mean to you personally?
Immense joy and satisfaction. It took me seven years to complete Millie and Melissa’s story. Over time, these two characters have gradually become an integral part of my life. It's exhilarating to know that other people appreciate them and can follow their story with a sense of interest and empathy. Also, as the prize is meant to reward the "most significant” book and themes of the year, I don't need to tell you that I deeply appreciate this accolade.
Do you have any projects in the pipeline or are you already working on another book?
After receiving the Prix Servais, I received a number of commissions for short texts. After that, I'd like to start work on the final volume of my "Luxembourg" trilogy: the first two stories, BLUE and RED, illustrated byAntic Ham, were published byRedfoxpress, in Ireland, in 2021 and 2024. WHITE will draw this project to a close. And, of course, there's always another novel on the horizon. I've got a few ideas that I'm going to dwell upon for a while before putting pen to paper, which I hope won't take seven years to complete this time round!
Thirty years of awards
The Servais Prize, awarded by theeponymous Foundation, is a literary prize and includes € 7,500 in prize money that has been granted every year since 1992 for works of poetry or prose published in Luxembourg, irrespective of the language of publication. Its winners include many famous Luxembourg authors such as Francis Kirps (2020), Elise Schmit (2019), Nico Helminger (2014 and 2018), Nora Wagener (2017), Ulrike Bail (2021) and Jérôme Quiqueret (2023). The Servais Prize is awarded by an independent jury.
The Servais Prize was awarded at the National Literature Centre in Mersch on 30th June 2025.
Last update26.02.2026
For more information
Multilingual literature
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Artistic creation
Pied de page
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/interview-alexis-juncosa-artistic-director-luxembourg-city-film-festival.html
Luxembourg City Film Festival
The first edition of the Luxembourg City Film Festival, known back then as the Discovery Zone Filmfestival, was held in 2011. Fifteen years on, the event has become a firm fixture in the national cultural landscape and a recognised festival on the European circuit. In the frame work of the 2026 edition, which runs from 5th to 15th March, Artistic Director Alexis Juncosa tells us how the festival has developed and speaks about the ambitions and opportunities that are shaping its future.
Quickfire questions
To begin our discussion, we asked Alexis Juncosa to answer six quickfire questions.
A backstage anecdote that has stayed with you
When Jafar Panâhi came to Luxembourg. After many years supporting his work while he was in prison or under house arrest, it was hugely meaningful for us to be able to finally welcome him for a film co-produced here in Luxembourg.
The star you would love to meet
Meryl Streep. Without question.
A life without film would be...
A life that needs reinventing!
Who inspired you to get into the profession?
My grandfather, a Catalan republican who was deeply affected by exile. Seeing him come to life as he watched post-war films showed me the power of cinema. Ever since then I have been trying to recreate that same emotional impact.
If LuxFilmFest were a film character, it would be...
A dynamic, slightly dishevelled hero who always ends up winning – somewhere between Slumdog Millionaire and an inveterate optimist.
Your favourite festival
It's impossible to pick just one. But I would love to go to theMidnight Sun Film Festivalin Finland, where the films never stop... because it never gets dark.
How has the festival developed over the past 15 years, and how is that reflected in your editorial policy?
The festival has experienced constant growth, with spectator numbers increasing from around 4,600 to ten times that(excluding the COVID period). Its four pillars – an international selection, documentaries, young adults and support for national production – have remained constant.
At the same time,we have professionalised the selection process – we now have a dedicated committee watching around a thousand films every year. Our editorial policy prioritises exclusive screenings, emerging cinema, innovative storytelling and lesser-known countries, especially those hit by crisis. Social issues and equality are central to our approach.
The festival's development has also had a real impact – it has become a key location for professionals, a place where projects are spawned. Some young filmmakers say they discovered their vocation at LuxFilmFest.
How do you promote under-represented film cultures while maintaining a balance between auteur and mainstream cinema?
We place great emphasis on under-represented film types, whether genre films or films made by social, ethnic or other minorities – like recently with the first film starring Rohingya actors.This strategy is also in line with the EU's priorities on visibility and solidarityand is reflected in our 2030 Award.
At the same time, we want the festival to be open, with something for everyone – comedies, dramas, action and more demanding films.Our goal is to put together a programme that is accessible to everyone, from die-hard film fans to families, while always giving people the opportunity to discover new voices.
How does the festival contribute to Luxembourg's international standing?
The visibility of LuxFilmFest has really grown in recent years. As well as being rankedamong the 25 "coolest" festivals in the worldbyMovieMaker, it has been approached by Cannes and by diplomatic missions and institutions for its expertise. This recognition was confirmed whenThe Hollywood Reporterdescribed it as the"hidden gem of European cinema".
The festival draws on strong partnerships, especially with other European festivals, as well as a professional team and around a hundred multilingual volunteers, who always go above and beyond and leave a positive impression on participants. As President ofEuropa Film Festivals, I am also involved instructuring the sector at European level and strengthening Luxembourg's role on the international stage.
LuxFilmFest at a glance
With nearly 40,000 participants since 2018, theLuxembourg City Film Festivalhas becomethe country's top film event.Every year it offers an outstanding selection combining exclusive screenings, feature films, documentaries and special showings, serving as a springboard for the film industry in Luxembourg and around the world.
Since 2012,it has awarded prizes for the best feature film, documentary and young adult film, and in 2022 it launched the 2030 Award for films depicting or related to international development issues.
In 2023,FIPRESCI– the International Federation of Film Critics – joined the event for the first time.
As well as screening films,LuxFilmFest also includes an exciting programme of cultural events, with theme nights, exhibitions, concerts, masterclasses, professional gatherings, creative workshops and much more, turning Luxembourg City into a vibrant hub for contemporary cinema.
LuxFilmFest 2026 – Trailer for the 16th edition (Video/Audio YouTube)
What role does the festival play in promoting the use of film as an educational tool, and how are attitudes towards international cinema changing in Luxembourg?
Education through film is an approach that is not yet well developed in Luxembourg, and the festival is helping to bridge that gap. Every year,nearly 6,000 students attend our film screenings, guided by teaching resources and external initiativessuch as International Holocaust Remembrance Day.
Public attitudes are also noticeably changing: with the LuxFilmFest and LuxFilmLab brands becoming increasingly well known,people are coming along much more out of curiosity, even for demanding films or documentaries.They appreciate the contextualisation, the discussions after the screenings and the collective experience. That explains why our screenings are attracting greater numbers every year, despite the growth in streaming platforms.
Has the festival helped develop new local talent?
Yes, and that is something we are noticing more and more.Young creators are coming with their first projects and explaining how their passion for film began at LuxFilmFest. Our Campus programme, which provides opportunities for contacts and networking among students from Luxembourg and the Greater Region, is building real bridges.
The festival also provides fertile ground for the animation sector, always on the lookout for international talent. LuxFilmFest has become a place for encounters and opportunities, attracting talent and benefiting the country as a whole.
Pushing the boundaries of narration
In 2026, the Immersive Pavilion will once again attract fans and professionals of extended reality (XR) from all over the world with a series of creative and innovative projects featuring virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) at iconic locations in Luxembourg City:neimënster,Mudamand Villa Louvigny.
Film Fund Luxembourgis looking forward to seeing you from 5th to 22nd March 2026!
How are immersive formats and AI (artificial intelligence) changing the creative arts and the role of festivals?
The Immersive Pavilion has become a popular part of the festival because of the quality of the works it showcases, including several Luxembourg productions that have won awards in Venice. Formats are changing quickly, with VR now being replaced by more varied experiences, often without a headset, and augmented reality becoming a part of our daily lives. Festivals need to keep up with these trends to stay relevant.
AI is already having a major impact on the industryin terms of subtitling, dubbing, translation and animation. Some professions are being turned upside down, and we are seeing entirely AI-generated films.These developments are coming thick and fast and can be worrying, but every technological revolution has also given rise to new professions.
In the current context, it is more important than ever that we support human creation.Cultural events have a key role to play, offering an irreplaceable collective experience, as opposed to the isolating impact of technology. Festivals are a place to meet people and exchange ideas, a place of cultural resistance.
How do you want to develop the festival over the next few years, and what are your priorities in that respect?
Over the long term,we want to give the festival a proper home, a central venue where we can organise events, workshops, meetings and educational activities.Having our own space would strengthen our European presence and transform the experience for the public: studies suggest that it could increase attendance by 30%.
Luxembourg currently has a booming film industry, with creators making a name for themselves at international level.The festival is both a reflection and a catalyst of this growth. If we want to maintain and encourage this trend, we will need greater support – public, private and sponsorship – so that we can keep attracting talent, appealing to varied audiences and seeing the cultural and economic benefits.Our ambition is to consolidate our role while offering an increasingly dynamic and structured framework for the film industry in Luxembourg.
As well as the plan for a dedicated venue,a major challenge is to encourage and facilitate the presence of international representatives. A few weeks ago, I was invited to a festival in Spain where the government had clearly made this a priority and a strategic driver. The more people you invite, the more opportunities you generate.
At a time when we are witnessing the rise of populism and nationalism, festivals are becoming bubbles where people from different countries can mix and mingle, thanks to their policy of welcoming people from all over the world. They also serve as an extraordinary breeding ground for creativity.
If I had to make a wish, it would be for LuxFilmFest to align itself more closely with international standards by setting aside realistic budgets to invite film crews– film makers, producers, actors and copyright holders. The main beneficiary would be Luxembourg. As well as the economic and tourist impact, a festival can be a wonderful tool for creating a brand image and developing a country's attractiveness.Tourism and culture need to go hand in hand.
Many thanks to thank Alexis Juncosa for this interview. We would like to let our readers know that for formatting reasons, some passages of the interview have been summarised.
Last update26.02.2026
For more information
Film Fund Luxembourg
The top 10 of Luxembourg international cinema
Audiovisual production
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/arts-crafts-luxembourg.html
Art and craft trades
Initiated by the Hereditary Grand Duke and Duchess, Luxembourg's art and craft trades biennial event entitled De Mains de Maîtres aims to give greater visibility to the artistic professions in the Grand Duchy and encourage new generations to follow this creative path. The fifth edition of the biennial will take place from 19 to 24 November 2025 at 19 Liberté, bringing together nearly 106 artists!
The 2025 Biennale: Singular Nature
At a time when climate change is redefining our environment, this edition celebrates nature that has been reinvented, poetic, sometimes utopian, but always meaningful.The theme "Singular Nature" invites artisans to explore their intimate relationship with nature in all its diversity and fragility.
The Czech Republic is the guest of honour, offering a unique insight into the craft traditions of Central Europe. In dialogue with 67 artists from Luxembourg, 39 Czech artists enrich the biennial with a strong intercultural dimension, where nature becomes a common language between territories and generations.
"Singular nature" issynonymous with a committed, sensitive and deeply human work.
The year 2025 marks a turning point and a renewalwith a new logo, a new visual identity and a new website. In the coming years, the ambition is to continue opening up beyond borders in order to promote Luxembourgish arts and crafts internationally, while continuing to showcase them nationally through various events.
This year'sprogramme continues outside the walls with nine partners, from Villa Vauban to Luxembourg House.
A royal initiative and a huge popular success
Their Royal Highnesses the Grand Duke Guillaume and the Grand Duchess Stéphanielaunched theDe Mains de Maîtres initiativetoshowcase modern craft tradesin the Grand Duchy. The exhibition at the crossroads of art and craft trades presentsthe search for innovationin the sector, witness tothe transmission of gestures and skills, and promotesthe creative talentsof the Grand Duchy, including on the international scene.
Thefirst editionof De Mains de Maîtres was held inDecember 2016.2017 a non-profit association, supported by Grand Duchess Stéphanie of Luxembourg, theChamber of Trades, BCEE and Roland Kuhn, was establishedto ensure the event's long-term future.
In November 2018,the second edition will be enhanced with more exhibition space and a photographic collection on craftsmanship. New cultural partners broaden the artistic perspectives offered to visitors.
Thethird editionof the biennial took place inNovember 2021 and is being held in Luxembourg and Paris. Under the theme "Live Materials", around a hundred European artists are exhibiting their craftsmanship. In Paris, the Impressions d'automne exhibition is being held in a private setting at the Ambassador's residence.
The theme ofthe fourth editionis"Le Geste et le Territoire"(The Gesture and the Territory).Ithonours Portugal, the largest foreign community in Luxembourg. The worksexplore themes of identity, heritage, the environment and cultural tiesbetween the two countries.
A themed biennial event, well-known internationally, offering prizes
The artisans selected for the  De Mains de Maîtres  biennial can not only benefit from the project'sinternational renown, but also showcase their work according to aspecific theme.And they may be fortunate enough to have their creation rewarded with aprize.
Internationally, the artists featured at the 2016 edition exhibited at the end of 2017 atLuxembourg's embassy in Brusselsand attheLin Deletaille Gallery. In May 2019, the 2018 edition of De Mains de Maîtres travelled to theGrand Palais in Paris for "Révélations", the international biennial event celebrating the arts and crafts trades and contemporary creation. The Grand Duchy was the guest of honour at the fourth edition of this unmissable event in the field of French and international creation.In May 2025, De Mains de Maîtres Luxembourg returns to Paris for the 7th edition of the Salon Révélations. In a scenography designed byAdrien Gardère, the Luxembourg installation entitled "Incroyable jardin (Incredible Garden) celebrates nature as a source of inspiration and transformation.
For each edition, the organisers award ajury prize, the Leir Foundation Prize, and an audience prize, the RTL Prize. In 2018,Lea Schroederwon the people's-choice prize.
De Mains De Maîtres
Exhibition view
© Flavie Hengen / De Mains de Maîtres
De Mains De Maîtres
Exhibition view
© Flavie Hengen / De Mains de Maîtres
De Mains De Maîtres
Exhibition view
© Flavie Hengen / De Mains de Maîtres
Lea Schroeder – an eclectic creator
Lea Schroederhas been creative since she was a child. Her mother introduced her to ceramics when she was just four years old; she studied Art Design inParis. She learned her trade fromthe creative stage through to production, and during her training she was able to gain work experience with major brand names such as Louis Vuitton and Hermès. She went on to specialise in accessories by attending a training course inMilanwith one of the world's leading luxury groups, and when she returned to Paris she ended up signing a contract to work with Lancel.
The desire to produceher own designsnevertheless became increasingly strong, and not being able to literallyuse her own handstriggered a desire both tobecome independentand toreturn to the Grand Duchy. The return to the homeland took placestep by stepthrough various projects: exhibitions at theKonschthaus beim Engel, as part ofDesign Cityor during the De Mains de Maîtres biennial. This last project, her first major piece of independent work, brought her dream of freedom to life.
For Lea Schroeder, being part of the Luxembourg scene  meanspromoting local work and showcasing the Grand Duchy abroad. Although the Grand Duchy is now her home base, she continues to work in other countries as well. Theart and crafts tradesareextremely importantto her, as they represent the excellence of skills bycombining top quality design, materials and techniques. In addition to producing items of her own brand, she also works onprojects for other people, acts as aconsultant, and enjoyssharing her experience and know-howwith other producers. Her multidimensional creative studio,Sensetree, helps to foster the growth of projects rooted in vision, sustainability and authenticity through a collaborative approach.
L'oiseau du paradis
Ceramic creation of a bird of paradise
© Lea Schroeder
La plume d'orée
Ceramic creation of a bird of paradise
© Lea Schroeder
Ceramic object
Ceramic creation
© Lea Schroeder
Lea Schroeder
The artist in her studio
© Marion Dessard
Lea Schroeder is aversatile artist: She is equally at home working inceramics,graphic designandtextiles. Each product is designed as atotal package: product, packaging, communication and presentation. Her ceramics, incloisonné faience, are also produced for commissions. She draws inspiration fromstories, customs and traditions. The spiritual aspect representsthe relationship between humans and nature, and she believes its interpretation is the basis for all creative work. Lea Schroeder develops her ideas using bothdigital and craft techniques: two elements that might seem contradictory but are in fact complementary for the artist, who cannot do without either.
Quick fact
As part of the accession to the throne, Lea Schroeder designed the stamp depicting the new Grand Ducal couple. In general, illustration now plays an important role in her creative work.
Her studio is currently at  the1535°in Differdange, were she can take advantage of the innovative environment and contact with other creators. As both an artist and a businesswoman, she advises young entrepreneurs tobelieve in themselves and in their projects, to keeptraining themselves and stay informed, todiversify and reinvent themselvesall the time, and toset out on the journeyshe defines as continuous discovery.
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
Employment in Luxembourg
Your business in Luxembourg
Artistic creation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/national-literary-competition-jhemp-hoscheit.html
National Literary Competition: Jhemp Hoscheit back on top
The authorJhempHoscheit, this year's clear favourite, was selected by the jury as the winner of the 2025 National Literary Competition for his novel "Den Impakt vu Klappentexter", a book which deals with the themes of loss and death.
At the 47th edition of Luxembourg's most prestigious literary prize,JhempHoscheit pipped Cathy Clement ("Neel mat Käpp") and Guy Helminger ("Die Elefantenhaut") in the adult authors category."Den Impakt vu Klappentexter" tells the tale of a retired librarianwhose wife died in a hit-and-run accident six years ago. The bereaved widower reflects on his life, work and grief, sharing his thoughts with his late wife, whom he visits regularly at the cemetery. Every now and then, he finds flowers left on the grave by an unknown visitor," explains the author.
JhempHoscheit has received several prizes over the course of his literary career, reflecting the esteem in which his work is held in Luxembourg. He has been recognised on several occasions by the National Literary Competition, winning first prize in 2001, and various of his works have also been awarded theLëtzebuerger Buchpräis. His novelPerl oder Picaearned him the prestigiousServais Prizein 1999. The novel was made into a film in 2005, with Jhemp's son Ben Hoscheit in the leading role.
Perl oder Pica (Video/Audio YouTube)
Interview withJhempHoscheit
Congratulations on this latest victory! What does it mean to you to win the National Literary Competition again?
Winning the National Literary Competition is above all a sign of recognition. The prize is an acknowledgement of my literary work. I enjoy taking part in competitions in all literary genres. Each time it's a real challenge. The competition has been going since 1978; I have taken part twenty times and received an award or a special mention on thirteen occasions. It is also a game, a test to see how I stand up against other authors. Participants send their typescripts to the jury under a pseudonym, and if the jury members appreciate my work then I feel that the award is well deserved. And that encourages me to keep on writing and publishing. But my true reward comes from the readers who read my books.
Your novel is called "Den Impakt vu Klappentexter". What gave you the idea to write a novel based around the back-cover blurb on books? What would you like readers to take away from your novel?
Jim Ellers, the grieving widow who loves reading, steers clear of novels that deal with grief, illness, sorrow and death. So he has to carefully peruse the back-cover blurb on any novels he is thinking of reading. He falls in love with a woman, develops a new appetite for life and starts looking for novels about second love. My book is an ode to literature and the power of memory – a celebration of the pleasure of reading. Sometimes something very small – a book, a flower, a buried secret – can be all it takes to get life back on track.
You are one of Luxembourg's best-known authors today. How would you describe your literary development since your early days as a writer?
My first novel, "Perl oder Pica" (Editions Schortgen, Servais Prize in 1999), was published in 1998. It is an autobiographical novel in which I describe the many experiences and adventures of a 12-year-old boy from Esch-sur-Alzette in 1962-63. In 2005, the Luxembourgish film director Pol Cruchten (1963-2019) adapted the book for the screen. Since that novel, my characters have grown increasingly distant from me. My literary self has moved further away, becoming more varied and taking on different identities – I invent characters and give them diverse lives. That's the fascinating, mysterious alchemy between fiction and reality.
What does Luxembourgish represent for you as a literary language?
All but two of my thirty publications (children's books, novels and satirical essays) are written in Luxembourgish. The Luxembourgish language is my second skin, the language I breathe in. My literary language is like breathing – it's where I feel at home. I am comfortable with it, and it allows me to delve into my imagination. The Minett region, with its characteristic red-earth landscapes, nourishes my soul and inspires me. In my writing, I dive into this world and draw on the past, while remaining rooted in the present and looking ahead to the future. I can only do that if I write in Luxembourgish.
JhempHoscheit: life at a glance
JhempHoscheit, born in Esch-sur-Alzette in 1951, studied French literature in Luxembourg and Strasbourg after attending theLycée de garçonsin Esch-sur-Alzette. He began his career as a teacher in 1975, first in Pétange and then in Esch, eventually reducing his hours to part time so that he could concentrate on his writing.He is a versatile author, publishing novels, poetry, essays, plays, cabaret texts and children's books.
His novel"Perl oder Pica", published in 1998 and inspired by his childhoodin Esch, was the first of a trilogy set in the 1960s. He also explores the fantasy genre in his books "Mondelia" and "Klangfaarwen". "Tëschent den Zeilen", published in 2022, addresses the 2020 lockdown. In "Ouninumm" (2024), he looks at the trauma of abuse through the story of a teenage girl. Jhemp Hoscheit is very active in Luxembourg's cabaret scene and is involved withJ(h)emp2andCabarenert. He is passionate about children's literature and has written several stories, plays and books with an educational dimension. He has won several prizes and continues to be an important figure in literary circles and in the voluntary and community sector in Luxembourg.
National Literary Competition: a long-standing award and a springboard for authors
The Ministry of Culture launched the annual National Literary Competitionin 1978 to encourage literary creation in Luxembourg. Over more than four decades,some 155 authors have received awards, with many going on to enjoy national and international recognition. Each year, the competition focuses on a different literary genre.
The works submitted to the competition must be original and may not be published in any form before the official results are announced. The first prize in the "adult authors" category is €7,500, together with a contribution of up to €5,000 towards publication costs on submission of a proposal by a recognised publisher. The author retains all rights to the publication.
Following the 2025 competition, which focused on novels, the genre of the 2026 edition will be poetry collections.
Last update18.12.2025
For more information
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Multilingual literature
Introduction to Luxembourgish
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/actresses-actors-luxembourgish-cinema.html
Luxembourgish film actors
Luxembourgish cinema has undergone significant developments since the 1980's, alongside national actresses and actors working in the film industry. Knowing all the local actors would mean knowing at least around a hundred celebrities. That's why we have selected ten for you, that simply must be seen at least once on the big screen!
Thierry van Werveke
Thisicon of the Luxembourgish film industry(1958-2009) starred inover 60 films and TV showsfrom 1988 to 2009. Thierry van Werveke has made regular appearances in German productions, and was the lead singer in several musical groups. He sticks to mind for his roles in:
After his death, theThierry van Werveke foundationwas created to honour his memory. It supportssocially disadvantaged young peoplegoing through difficult times, by bringing them together and helping them make progress through cultural means.
Désirée Nosbusch
Désirée Nosbusch is anactress and presenterwho was born in Luxembourg in 1965. She made the leap frombeing a child celebrity to being a highly sought-after actress. She began her career as a presenter for children onRadio Luxembourgwhen she was twelve. She then left for New York to train as an actress. In the 1990's, she became a regular presenter for international events, gala events and award ceremonies in Europe. Since then, she has taken part ina large number of TV productionsin Luxembourg, but also in the United States of America, Italy and Germany:
Luc Feit
Luc Feit was born in Luxembourg in 1962 and has been living in Berlin since 1992. He is one of the stars of the Luxembourgish film industry. He is anactor as well as a director and writer. After training as an actor at theStaatliche Schauspielschulein Stuttgart, and after five years of permanent commitment, he performed as a freelance actor at theVolksbühne Berlin/Ratten07, theThéâtre de la Collinein Paris, theThéâtre des Capucins, the Luxembourg National Theatre and theRuhrfestspieleof Recklinghausen, among others. He featured in many plays as well as cinema films, TV films and series.
In 2019, he wasnominated for the Oscarsin the "best foreign language film" category for "Werk ohne Autor" (2018; Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck), a film about the life of an artist based on the biography ofGerhard Richter.
Here are some other productions he is known for:
André Jung
André Jung was born in Luxembourg in 1953. He studied drama at the Stuttgart University of Music and Performing Arts and was then recruited by the Basel Theatre, theDeutsche Schauspielhausin Hamburgand the Zurich Theatre, among others. He performed at theMünchener Kammerspieleand theStaatsoper Stuttgart. He has already been awardedmany prizesand, besides working in theatres, he often performson television and film. What's more, he has already lent his voice toover 50 radio shows.
Here are his most famous films:
Marco Lorenzini
Marco Lorenzini was born in Luxembourg in 1950 and isa stage and film actor. After various studies and volunteering in the army, he worked as a prison officer before being able to take up his dream job. Since then, he has not only performed innational productions, but also made a name for himself onthe international stagealongside internationally renowned actors and actresses. He was present on the stages of the Apollo Festival, theRuhrfestspieleinRecklinghausen, the world theatre festival Art Carnuntum, theThéâtre de la Collinein Paris and many others. The film "Le Tout Nouveau Testament", in which he plays the role of a tramp turned evangelist, wasnominated in 2016 for the Golden Globe and the Oscarsin the category "Best Foreign Language Film".
Here are some of the films where you can discover his talent:
Vicky Krieps
In2017, Vicky Krieps' career came to a major turning point: she performs alongside Daniel Day-Lewis in the film "Phantom Thread" by Paul Thomas Anderson. A story that takes place in the world ofhaute couturein London in the 1950s where a couturier takes a young waitress as his muse... The feature film was released in theatres in 2018, where it was critically acclaimed andnominated for several Oscars, including for the Best Picture and Best Actor. Vicky Krieps was born in Luxembourg in 1983. She studied at the Zurich University of Arts and is only at the start ofa big career:
In 2022 Vicky Krieps wasnominated for Best Actress at the 2022CesarAwards, for her role in Mathieu Amalric's film "Serre-moi fort". She won theBest Performance Award at the 75thCannes Film Festivalfor her role as Empress Elisabeth of Austria in the film "Corsage"by Marie Kreutzer.
Tommy Schlesser
Thomas "Tommy" Schlesser is anactor, comedian and model. He was born in Luxembourg in 1989. At university, he started studying law, and while he did, he passed the entrance exam to the Cologne Film Drama School. But he never started his training there.Luxembourgish television offered him to take part in a sitcom and he accepted to gain experience as an actor: "Comeback" (2012; Lucil Films) is about three youngsters who bet that they will bring Ronny Riff, a "has been" singer of the 1980's, to the 2013 Eurovision Song Contest. He then completed his acting studies in Los Angeles in the United States.
Up until now, Tommy Schlesser has mainly made himself a namein Luxembourg and Germany. Here are some of the most famous roles he played:
Myriam Muller
Myriam Muller is a Luxembourgishactress and a stage and film director. Born in 1971, she landed her first major film role in "Hochzäitsnuecht" about an upper-middle-class marriage with one thing in common: drugs (1992; Pol Cruchten). She then playedMarie, Jesus' mother, in the film "Marie de Nazareth"(1995; Jean Delannoy), and smaller roles in the films "8 Women 1/2", in which, following a mother's death, a father and a son open a brothel on their Geneva estate (1999;Peter Greenaway), and "L'Ombre du vampire", a fictional documentary on the making of the classic vampire movieNosferatu(2000; E. Elias Merhige).
In the "Club des chômeurs" (2001; Andy Bausch), Myriam Muller has one of the lead roles: an employee of the employment agency in charge of Geronimo's file (main character) who falls in love with him. She also appeared in theLuxembourgish productions"Doudege Wénkel" (2012; Christophe Wagner) a detective film in which inspector Hastert deals with his last case before retiring - the investigation into the death of a police colleague, "Mammejong" (2015; Jacques Molitor) where a man-child must break unhealthy ties with his mother in order to win over the heart of a young woman, "Rusty Boys" (2017; Andy Bausch) and "Kommunioun" (2023; Jacques Molitor), the story of Martin, a boy like no other..
Today, she is especially known forher work as a stage directorand asArt Director of theThéâtre du Centaure.
Jules Werner
Jules Werner was born in Luxembourg in 1977 and has been anactor since adolescence. He studied in England and is todayone of the most famous Luxembourgish stage and film actors. He was awarded theLëtzebuerger Filmpräisin 2014 for best artistic contribution, for his role as inspector Faber in the detective thriller "Doudege Wénkel"by Christophe Wagner,
Other must watch films and series featuring Jules Werner:
Fernand Fox
Fernand Fox was born in Luxembourg in 1934. He isone of the most famous national cinema and theatre celebrities. He was discovered in 1956 by Eugène Heinen, theatre manager, during a presentation at theCasino Bourgeois. Fernand Fox took courses in diction and comedy at the Luxembourg City Conservatory for three years. He then made a name for himself onthe stage of Luxembourg theatresas well as byappearing in cinema and television films, and commercials:
Fernand Fox died in September 2024 at the age of 90.
Last update19.08.2025
For more information
Film Fund Luxembourg
Theatre production - a varied programme of international quality
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/top-10-luxembourg-international-cinema.html
The top 10 of Luxembourg international cinema
The animated film "Mr Hublot" is undoubtedly the milestone of Luxembourg's audiovisual production. Indeed, in 2014 it won the Oscar for best animated short film, and the face of this man who wears enormous thick glasses and has four square holes on his forehead through which numbers scroll is now part of the popular imagination.
Nevertheless, for decades, Luxembourg cinema has gone far beyond this animated film and has enjoyed international success. The 2019 edition of the Cannes Film Festival is a fine example of this international influence: three films were part of the official competition 'Un certain regard' and another one of the 'Quinzaine des réalisateurs' and two feature films won prizes:Chambre 212(On a Magical Night), Prize for Best Performance for Chiara Mastroianni, andO que arde(Fire will come), Jury Prize.
With also the participation of famous film stars, here is a selection of 10 international films that have a Luxembourg participation and we invite you to browse! Actually, 10 + 1, sinceMr Hublotis not to be missed!
Mr Hublot
Mr Hublot (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
A withdrawn character with obsessive-compulsive disorders, Mr Hublot is afraid of change and the outside world. His solution: he doesn't leave his apartment! The arrival of a robot dog will turn his life upside down: he has to share his house with this very intrusive companion...
Year:2014
Directors:Laurent Witz, Alexandre Espigares
Producers:Zeilt Productions (Luxembourg), Watt Frame (France), Arte (France)
Duration:11.48 min.
Animated short film
For more information
On a Magical Night (Chambre 212)
Chambre 212 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
After 20 years of marriage, Maria decides to leave her husband. She moves into room 212 in the hotel across the street, with a breathtaking view of her apartment, her husband and the life she shared with him. As she wonders if she has made the right decision, many people in her life give their opinions on the matter.
Year:2019
Casting:Chiara Mastroianni, Vincent Lacoste, Camille Cottin, Benjamin Biolay, Marie-Christine Adam, Carole Bouquet
Director:Christophe Honoré
Producers:Bidibul Productions (Luxembourg), Les Films Pelléas (France), Scoope Pictures (Belgium)
Duration:88 min.
For more information
Tel Aviv on Fire
Tel Aviv on Fire (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Salam, 30, lives in East Jerusalem. He is Palestinian and an intern on the set of the successful Arab soap operaTel Aviv on Fire. Every morning, he crosses the same checkpoint on his way to work in Ramallah. One day, Salam is interrogated by Assi, an Israeli officer whose wife is a big fan of the soap opera.
Year:2018
Casting:Kais Nashif, Lubna Azabal, Yaniv Biton, Nadim Sawalha, Maisa Abd Elhadi, Salim Daw, Laëtitia Eïdo, Wafaa Abo Zarifa, Amer Oklah
Director:Sameh Zoabi
Producers:Samsa Film (Luxembourg), TS Productions (France)
Duration:95 min.
For more information
Zero Impunity
Zero Impunity (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
For centuries, sexual crimes in war zones have had devastating consequences for survivors. Few of them had the support they needed to break the taboo and finally free their word. This film, which echoes their voices, is a necessary cry to raise public awareness but above all an ode to life and humanity.
Year:2018
Directors:Nicolas Blies, Stéphane Hueber-Blies (Blies Brothers), Denis Lambert
Producers:a_BAHN (Luxembourg), Mélusine Productions (Luxembourg), Camera Talk (France), Webspider (France).
Duration:90 min.
Animated film
For more information
The Girl with a Pearl Earring
La jeune fille de la perle (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
The film tells the story of Griet, a 16-year-old Dutch girl who becomes a cleaning lady in the house of the painter Johannes Vermeer. Her calmness and perspicacity not only help her with her household chores, but also attract the painter's attention.
Year:2002
Casting:Colin Firth, Scarlett Johansson, Essie Davis, Judy Parfitt, Tom Wilkinson, Joanna Scanlan
Director:Peter Webber
Producers:DeLux Productions (Luxembourg), Archer Street (United Kingdom)
Duration:100 min.
The Swallows of Kabul (Les hirondelles de Kaboul)
Les hirondelles de Kaboul (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Summer 2001, Kabul in ruins is occupied by the Taliban. Atiq and Mussarat have been married for many years and hardly ever speak to each other. Mohsen and Zunaira are young and deeply in love. One foolish act by Mohsen will change the fate of his couple. Mussarat will help the man she loves regain his ability to love.
Year:2017
Directors:Zabou Breitman, Eléa Gobbé-Mévellec
Producers:Mélusine Productions (Luxembourg), Les Armateurs (France), Close Up Films (Switzerland)
Duration:80 min.
Animated film
For more information
Colonia
Colonia (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Inspired by real events, the film tells the story of Lena and Daniel, a young couple who became entangled in the Chilean military coup of 1973. Daniel is kidnapped by Pinochet's secret police and Lena follows him to a sealed-off area in the south of the country called Colonia Dignidad.
Year:2016
Casting:Emma Watson, Daniel Bruhl, Michael Nyqvist, Vicky Krieps, Martin Wuttke, Richenda Carey, Jeanne Werner, Steve Karier, August Zirner
Director:Florian Gallenberger
Producers:Iris Productions (Luxembourg), Majestic Filmproduktion (Germany), Rezo Productions (France), Rat Pack Filmproduktion (Germany).
Duration:110 min.
For more information
Extraordinary Tales
Extraordinary Tales (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Five stories by Edgar Allan Poe, each designed in a graphic style adapted to different segments and inspired by visual artists and illustrators, whose style best expresses the depth and psychological complexity of Poe's dark world.
Year:2015
Director:Raul Garcia
Producers:Mélusine Productions (Luxembourg), Melon Digital (Spain), R&R Communications (USA), The Big Farm (Belgium)
Duration:73 min.
Animated film
For more information
Fire Will Come (O que arde)
O que arde (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
When Amador gets out of prison for setting a fire, no one is waiting for him. He returns to his hometown, a small village hidden in the mountains of rural Galicia, to live with his eldest mother, Benedicta, and three cows. Life goes on quietly until the night when a fire devastates the area.
Year:2019
Casting:Amador Aria Mon, Benedicta Sanchez, Inazio Brao, Nuria Sotelo, Ruben Gomez Coelho, Ivan Yanez, Luis Manuel Guerrero Sanchez
Director:Olivier Laxe
Producers:Tarantula Luxembourg (Luxembourg), 4 A 4 Productions (France), Miramemira (Spain), Kowalski Films (Spain)
Duration:75 min.
For more information
Hey Good Looking! (Comme t'y es belle)
Comme t'y es belle (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis
Isa, Alice, Léa and Nina share their lives between love stories, a beauty salon under fiscal inspection, children to raise, an undocumented Moroccan nanny about to perform a civil partnership, repeated diets, family and religious holidays to honor. But before being beautiful, their biggest challenge is to be themselves.
Year:2006
Casting:Michèle Laroque, Aure Atika, Valérie Benguigui, Géraldine Nakache, Marthe Villalonga, Francis Huster
Director:Lisa Azuelos
Producers:Samsa Film (Luxembourg), Liaison cinématographique (France), Wild Bunch (Germany)
Duration:85 min.
For more information
The Orphanage (Parwareshgah)
The Orphanage (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
In the late 1980s, 15-year-old Qodrat lives on the streets of Kabul and sells cinema tickets on the black market. He's a big Bollywood fan and he gets caught dreaming in some of his preferred movie scenes. One day the police take him to the Soviet orphanage.
Year:2019
Casting:Qodratollah Qadiri, Sediqa Rasuli, Masihullah Feraji, Hasibullah Rasooli, Ahmad Fayaz Omani
Director:Shahrbanoo Sadat
Producers:Samsa Film (Luxembourg), Adomeit Films (Danmark), Adomeit Berlin (Germany), Wolf Pictures (Afghanistan), La Fabrica Nocturna Productions (France)
Duration:100 min.
For more information
Last update23.01.2026
For more information
Film Fund Luxembourg
10 Luxembourgish movies to watch
Audiovisual production
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/world-war-luxembourgish-films.html
World War II in Luxembourgish films
Very early in the morning of 10 May 1940, in spite of the strict observance of neutrality, the German war machine was set in motion against the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. The state of Luxembourg quickly found itself under the boot of the Nazi occupier. The invasion had been prepared long in advance and struck with a lightning speed.
German parachuted units and motorised columns occupied the country in the morning and Luxembourg, lacking any means of defence because of its international status, could not put up any resistance to the abysmal German military machine that was - for the second time in less than three decades - violating Luxembourg's territorial sovereignty.
With his fanatical ambition tointegrate Luxembourgers - deemed to be 'volksdeutsch' - to the German nation, Adolf Hitler brought Luxembourg under German control. In fact, on 29 July 1940, following three months of military occupation, the establishment of the regime paved the way to untold suffering. The German annexation was vicious and brutal. Acts offorced enlistment,imprisonments,deportationsandexecutionswere now on the agenda.
The era under Nazi domination is certainly the darkest hour in the Grand Duchy's history. And over 70 years after the end of this plight, the nightmare of the 1930's and the atrocities that ensued at the hands of the Third Reich still haunt the collective memory of Luxembourgers.
The crimes that were committed by Nazi Germany cannot be erased or forgotten. But to prevent such horror from happening ever again,the duty of remembranceis vital. That is why the traces of these crimes have been adopted in fiction and documentaryLuxembourgish filmsas a moral injunction. In fact, alongside repeated efforts such as remembrance events or teaching this dark part of national history to schoolchildren, a wide range of films on Wold War II in connection with the Grand Duchy enable the memory to live on and to keep the atrocities perpetrated by the Germans alive in thenational consciousness.
All Luxembourgish films or international co-productions on the topic are of great value for the cinematic, if not the historical heritage. As a result, drawing up a full list of the best productions is an impossible task. However, we have made a selection.
'Lëtzebuerg ass fräi'
Lëtzebuerg ass fräi (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
The 10th September 1944 is seen as the day of liberation of Luxembourg and its capital city. These memorable moments of the Liberation have been kept in this 17-minute documentary, bringing this historic day to life through old photographs. German troops withdrew from Luxembourgish territory on 17 February 1945.
Year of release:1944
Director:Pierre Bertogne
Duration:17 min.
Genre:Documentary
'Pour la liberté'(for freedom)
Synopsis:
This film starts with pre-war footage of Luxembourg, a peaceful place where happiness abounds under the protection of the dynasty. Footage of the Germans invading the country follow, and of all the events that occurred in Luxembourg between 1940 and 1945-1946. The film contains both archive footage and reconstructed scenes.
Year of release:1948
Director:Philippe Schneider
Duration:27 min.
Genre:Documentary
'Déi Zwéi vum Bierg'
Synopsis:
Mill and Välten are two friends living in a small village in the North of Luxembourg. The 1940 Nazi occupation changed their lives forever. The film presents day-to-day life under German occupation: confiscations and humiliations, the threat of forced enlistment, deaths of relatives, deportations, collaboration and resistance.
Year of release:1985
Actors:Fernand Mathes, Christian Kmiotek, Fernand Fox, Marie-Christine Faber, Vicky Weydert, Juliette François, Marie-Paule Von Roesgen, André Jung, Pol Greisch
Directors:Menn Bodson, Marc Olinger, Gast Rollinger
Duration:176 min.
Genre:Fiction
'Schacko Klak'
Schacko Klak (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
The film starts with the story of an 11-year old boy, Chrëscht Knapp, a carpenter's son, under German occupation in 1942. One fine day, Chrëscht's small village is turned upside down when the Gestapo searches houses to find members of the resistance, and the Knapps' home is one of them.
Year of release:1990
Actors:Claude Wagner, André Jung, Michèle Clees, Pol Greisch, Josiane Peiffer, Ulrich Eichenberger, Alain Hoffmann, Myriam Muller, Steve Karier, Shirin Fabeck, Mike Lacour, Christian Kmiotek, Luc Feit, Marie-Paule Von Roesgen, Thierry Van Werveke
Director:Paul Kieffer, Fränk Hoffmann
Duration:89 min.
Genre:Fiction
'Heim ins Reich'
Synopsis:
Featuring a multitude of testimonies and footage filmed at the time,Heim ins Reichis an account of the ordeal that Luxembourg and its population went through under German occupation from 10 May 1940 to 10 September 1944. Most of the witnesses in the film were active members of the resistance against the German occupation.
Year of release:2004
Director:Claude Lahr
Duration:118 min.
Genre:Documentary
'Der neunte Tag'
Der neunte Tag (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Abbey Henry Kremer officially obtained nine days of leave from the Dachau concentration camp, where he was imprisoned along with approximately 3,000 European clergymen. His mission: convince the leaders of the Luxembourg Catholic Church to support the Nazi occupation. If he does not return, his  colleagues will be executed.
Year of release:2004
Actors:Ulrich Matthes, August Diehl, Bibiana Beglau, Germain Wagner, Jean-Paul Raths, Hilmar Thate
Director:Volker Schlöndorff
Duration:97min.
Genre:Fiction
'Léif Letzebuerger'
Léif Lëtzebuerger (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Léif Lëtzebuergertells the story of the Grand Duchess Charlotte in exile during World War II. She was forced to leave Luxembourg and this documentary is about the departure and exile of the Grand Duchess and her government via France, Spain and Portugal, before reaching London, from where she supported the Luxembourgish people during her speeches at the BBC.
Year of release:2008
Director:Ray Tostevin
Duration:98min.
Genre:Documentary
'Réfractaire'
Réfractaire (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Integrate into the Wehrmacht or join the resistance? This is the dilemma that 21 year-old François is faced with in May 1944 upon his return to Luxembourg after completing his studies in Germany. The young man must make a choice: with the aim of liberating the world from Nazi control and the hope of regaining his freedom, he opts for the second choice.
Year of release:2009
Actors:Grégoire Leprince-Ringuet, Marianne Basler, Thierry Van Werveke
Director:Nicolas Steil
Duration:100min.
Genre:Fiction
Emil
Emil (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
In the summer of 1943, under Nazi occupation in Luxembourg, the young member of the resistance, Emil Schwirtz kills two German police officers. His friend Félix Lux is killed by the Nazis, but Emil manages to hide. Over 500 German policemen and soldiers look for Emil and other members of the resistance in the villages of Eschdorf and Heiderscheid. The film is a mix of interviews and fictional scenes.
Year of release:2010
Actors:Yves Reuland, Pol Greisch, Félix Eischen
Director:Thoma Tousch
Duration:115 min.
Genre:Fiction
'Heemwéi - eng Odyssee'
Heemwéi (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
France, September 1944: The end of World War II seems imminent as allied troops get closer to Berlin. Jos and Frenz, two  Luxembourgers, decide to lay down their arms and desert the German army. This is the story of their long and difficult return journey...
Year of release:2014
Actors:Steve Hoegener, Janine Horsburgh, Luc Lamesch, Nilton Martins, Sascha Migge, Carole Nourry
Director:Jean-Louis Schuller
Duration:99min.
Genre:Fiction
'Eng nei Zäit'
Eng nei Zäit (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
In February 1945, Jules returns home after fighting for the Maquis, a French resistance group. Back in his hometown, Jules hopes to regain peace and put the war behind him.  When his fiancée is found murdered with a family of German farmers with whom she worked, the life that Jules was leading to rebuild himself crumbles.
Year of release:2015
Actors:Luc Schiltz, Jules Werner, André Jung, Fabienne Elaine Hollwege, Elsa Rauchs, Luc Feit, Eugénie Anselin, Frédéric Frenay, Jean-Paul Raths, Jean-Paul Maes, Philippe Thelen, Max Gindorff
Director:Christophe Wagner
Duration:100min.
Genre:Fiction
Last update14.11.2024
The top 10 of Luxembourg international cinema
10 Luxembourgish movies to watch
Film Fund Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/luxembourg-must-see-films.html
10 Luxembourgish movies to watch
The Luxembourg film industry has a long history. The first film shot in the country was made by the Lumière brothers in 1899. Before the First World War and from the 1920s onwards, various filmmakers and cinema enthusiasts made short films or documentaries, but none of them really captured the public's attention. In the 1980s, filmmaker Andy Bausch and actors Thierry van Werveke and Myriam Muller brought movies made in Luxembourg to a large audience. From then on, the next logical step was international recognition and a domestic film industry, both of which have become established by now. Join us and discover 10 iconic productions and co-productions made in Luxembourg that you should definitely watch!
Capitani
Capitani (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Five days after its launch on the global Netflix network, the Capitani series has already made it into the top 10 in 46 countries. The thriller tells the story of Inspector Capitani who investigates the murder of a young girl found dead at the foot of a cliff near the Luxembourg village of Manscheid. Little by little the secrets of the small village are revealed until a terrible truth emerges.
Year of release:2019
Actors:Luc Schiltz, Sophie Mousel
Director:Christophe Wagner
Length:12 seasons / 26 min.
Troublemaker
Troublemaker (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Now regarded as THE cult Luxembourgish film,Troublemakertells the story of Jacques, a loudmouthed prison inmate who likes to call himself Johnny Chicago. In prison, he comes up against a fellow inmate named Chuck. They get into a fight, then become friends. Together they dream of going to America. No one, not even Jenny, Johnny's girlfriend, manages to stop the two buddies. Andy Bausch directed two sequels to the film (Back in TroubleandTrouble No More).
Year of release:1988
Actors:Thierry Van Werveke, Ender Frings, Nicole Max
Director:Andy Bausch
Length:98 mins
Little known beginnings
In the early 20th century and until it gained professional status, the film industry in Luxembourg operated on a relatively small scale. In 1927, a first specialist film magazine entitledLe film luxembourgeoiswas launched by journalist and film critic Evy Friedrich. Friedrich also shot a number of short documentary films, the most notable of which wasLes Danseurs d'Echternach, presented at the Cannes Film Festival in 1947. Another pioneer of the Luxembourg film industry wasRené Leclère(Un clown dans la rue, 1930). From 1937 to 1953, he made nine documentary films.Pierre Bertognealso made a name for himself in the Luxembourg cinema landscape. From 1930 to 1940, as an amateur, he produced several films that reflected the major historical events of the time, includingLëtzebuerg ass fräi.
Filmmaker Philippe Schneider then took up the baton for the next three decades, with around thirty films to his name by 1979 (documentaries and promotional, industrial and tourism films).
De falschen Hond
De falschen Hond (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Luxembourg, October 1830. The fallout from the Belgian Revolution is felt throughout the region. Tired of Dutch domination, most people want to become Belgian. Only a handful call for an independent Luxembourg. One of them is a municipal clerk who stubbornly refuses to accept Belgian nationality. Seen as a traitor, he is forced to go into exile.
Year of release:1989
Actors:André Jung, Denise Gregoire, Raoul Biltgen, Pol Greisch, Marc Olinger, Marie-Christine Faber, Henri Losch, Marie-Paule Von Roesgen
Directors:Menn Bodson, Gast Rollinger, Marc Olinger
Length:114 mins
A Wopbopaloobop A Lopbamboom
Synopsis:
The date is 31 December 1962. Rocco has just been released from prison. He heads for Dudelange to see his girlfriend Véro and at the same time get his hands on some cash. Because Rocco has a dream: he wants to travel to America. But New Year's Eve takes a dramatic turn. Rocco's carefully laid plans are upset by a fatal stabbing, and his American dream goes up in smoke. Early in the morning, he leaves Dudelange.
Year of release:1989
Actors:Thierry Van Werveke, Désirée Nosbusch, Konrad Scheel, Jochen Senf, Birol Uenel, Serge Wolf, Sabine Berg, Géraldine Karier
Director:Andy Bausch
Length:86 mins
Hochzäitsnuecht
Synopsis:
A high society wedding. Catherine is from a rich family, Christian from a poor family. They have just got married. The newlyweds have one thing in common: drugs, and more specifically heroin. After the wedding celebrations, Catherine leaves their apartment in search of drugs. But she does not come back.
Year of release:1991
Actors:Myriam Muller, Thierry Van Werveke, Ender Frings, Paul Scheuer, Marja-Leena Junker
Director:Pol Cruchten
Length:108 mins
The 1980s: national and international recognition
In the 1980s, the Luxembourg film industry was beginning to gather pace when the young director Andy Bausch arrived as a fresh face on the cinema scene. Over time he soon assembled a core group of young actors likeThierry Van Werveke and Myriam Muller. In 1987, he directed the filmTroublemaker, a police comedy that was an instant hit with younger audiences.
1989 was a pivotal year for the Luxembourg film industry. Driven by the country's producers, and following considerable government investment, Luxembourg's production structures became more professional.
Over the following decade, Luxembourg cinema underwent rapid development. In 1992,Hochzäitsnuecht(Wedding Night)byPol Cruchtenwas the first feature-length film to be screened at theCannes Festival, and eight months later the same film won theMax OphülsPrize inSaarbrücken.
Le club des chômeurs
Le club des chômeurs (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
In southern Luxembourg, the steel industry is increasingly on the decline. One by one the workers lose their jobs. Five of them decide to create the "club des chômeurs", the unemployed club, where the main rule is not to go back to work even if the possibility arises. Geronimo, Théid, Frunnes, Sonny Boy, Abbes and Petz all agree to abide by the club's strict rules.
Year of release:2001
Actors:Thierry Van Werveke, Myriam Muller, André Jung, Marco Lorenzini, Luc Feit, Fernand Fox, Christian Kmiotek, Marja-Leena Junker
Director:Andy Bausch
Length:97 mins
Mammejong
Synopsis:
Philippe, known as Flëpp, lives on his own with his strict, depressive mother Sophie in a little town in Luxembourg. His father drowned himself when Flëpp was little, but the young man never fully came to terms with the trauma, largely because of his obsessive, incestuous relationship with his mother. But suddenly a young Bosnian girl, Leena, enters his life, and things start to change.
Year of release:2015
Actors:Myriam Muller, Jules Werner, Max Thommes, Christiane Rausch, Maja Juric
Director:Jacques Molitor
Length:80 mins
Setting up film production in Luxembourg
In the wake of this surprising growth, production companies began focusing their attention on co-productions with foreign partners. This development also benefited the animation sector, which has gained huge momentum in Luxembourg, to such an extent that a two-year higher education diploma (BTS) in animation drawing has been launched in the country. There are currently around 20 production companies in Luxembourg, and audiovisual production is on the rise. Nearly 200 feature filmsand 130 short filmshave been produced or co-produced in Luxembourg since the early 1970s. Since then, a constant stream of films from Luxembourg have left their mark on the global industry.
Rusty Boys
Rusty Boys (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
Fed up with being treated like children, four elderly men (Fons, Lull, Nuckes and Jängi) decide to share a house together rather than going to a retirement home. They find a house that is currently unoccupied and seems to suit their plan. The only problem is coming up with the money. But they have no intention of giving up.
Year of release:2017
Actors:André Jung, Marco Lorenzini, Fernand Fox, Pol Greisch, Josiane Peiffer, Monique Reuter, Valérie Bodson, Myriam Muller
Director:Andy Bausch
Length:107 mins
Superjhemp retörns
Superjhemp retörns (Video/Audio YouTube)
Synopsis:
The fictional country of Luxusbuerg is preparing for the coronation of the young duke after the death of his father. But a terrorist organisation is planning to destroy the entire country. To save "little" Luxembourg, the country calls on Superjhemp, who has been missing for years. Working as a civil servant since retiring from life as a superhero, he needs to figure out how to get back his lost superpowers to help his country.
Year of release:2018
Actors:André Jung, Désirée Nosbusch, Etienne Halsdorf, Jules Werner, Luc Feit, Jules Waringo, Henri Losch, Jean-Paul Maes, Julie Kieffer, Tommy Schlesser
Director:Félix Koch
Length:100 mins
Last update13.02.2025
World War II in Luxembourgish films
The top 10 of Luxembourg international cinema
Film Fund Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/film-fund.html
Film Fund Luxembourg
The audiovisual production sector has attracted crowds to cinema theatres for decades. Co-produced Luxembourg and international productions have even managed to delight the public abroad. This success is largely owed to the Luxembourg Film Fund's relentless commitment.
Cinema is often referred to as "the seventh art". Cinematic experience is also about diversity, pleasure, discovery and even the development of a critical mind. But above all, cinema is an industry. TheFilm Fund Luxembourg's role is to manage the film industry in Luxembourg by setting the stage to make sure it has every chance to succeed.
Although it is a niche market, Luxembourgish films have been paid off with a string of successes and rewards at national and international level for decades. These success stories are largely attributable to the unfailing commitment of the Film Fund Luxembourg. It is a public institution that aims to develop audiovisual production in Luxembourg under the supervision of the Minister of Culture and the Minister in charge of the audiovisual sector. It plays different roles:promoting cinema and audiovisual productions as well as encouraging the production, co-production and distribution of cinematographic works.
In terms offinancial supportfor the film industry, the Film Fund provides selective financial aid for  writing and/or development and production to 15 film projects out of 29 this year. The largest aid went to  the  filmTally Ho! in an amount of 3 million euros. Overall, six films, one animated film, one documentary film, one series, one animated documentary series, one animated series, two short films and two animated shorts are supported financially.From 1990 to date, the mechanism of the support programmes has made it possible to produce over 600 audiovisual works.
The Fund also cooperates with representatives of the audiovisual industry, such as the Luxembourg Film Academy, the Luxembourg Producers' Association (ULPA) or the Luxembourgish Association of Filmmakers and Scriptwriters (LARS). It also represents Luxembourg in all itsEuropean and international audiovisual initiativessuch asEurimages, the Pan European Coproduction Fund, Creative Europe – Media, the European Commission's support programme aimed at providing a framework for a rapidly expanding Luxembourg audiovisual industry.
What's more, the Film Fund does all it can to increase itssupport to animated films. They accumulate festival selections, nominations and prestigious awards. These new awards once again honour the work of all professionals in the Luxembourg animation sector. A vast amount of work is owed to the Film Fund's involvement, which organises meetings between producers and other actors in the sector. In June 2022, the Film Fund organised its French animation coproduction meetings in collaboration with SODEC, a Canadian cultural enterprise development organisation,Wallonie Bruxelles Images(Belgium), the Federal Office of Culture and Swiss Films (Switzerland). These events are an opportunity for producers to develop their network and discuss potential collaborations. This year, 23 producers met as part of 55 meetings.
Since 2003, the Fund has overseen the organisation of theLuxembourg Film Awards(Lëtzebuerger Filmpräis), which reward the best film contributions in the country. Since 2003, every two years, the red carpet welcomes the very best of Luxembourgish cinema for the Luxembourg Film Awards ceremony. This award ceremony, which recognizes thebest Luxembourgish productionsis organised by the Film Fund in close collaboration with the Luxembourg Film Academy (d'Filmakademie). The Academy was created in 2012 on the initiative of the associations of film technicians (ALTA), directors and screenwriters (LARS), actors (ACTORS.LU) and producers (ULPA).
But theLëtzebuerger Filmpräisis not only an award ceremony or a quest to recognise winners. The purpose of the ceremony is to showcase high-quality films, encourage cinematographic creation, promote the development of the film industry in the Grand Duchy, and draw public attention to Luxembourgish productions.
The9th edition of theLëtzebuerger Filmpräistook place in September 2021.
The awards are small statues that were created by Luxembourgish artistPatricia Lippertback in 2003.
Triumphant films at the festivals
On top of promoting Luxembourg as a production site,the Film Fund strengthens the visibility of audiovisual productionsby making their presence felt at international festivals.Here are some recent examples that have made their mark on red carpets around the world.
The Luxembourg co-productionLes rois du monde(Los Reyes del Mundo) by Iris Productions (Nicolas Steil & Katarzyna Ozga) has just won two awards at the70th San Sebastián International Film Festival, one of the most popular Spanish film festivals since 1953:the Grand Prize (Golden Shell) for Best Filmand theCritics' Prizeawarded by the Spanish Film Press Association.
The filmLes rois du mondeis the second feature film ofColombian Director Laura Mora. It was co-produced by Luxembourg, Colombia, France, Mexico and Norway, with the support of the Film Fund. The film is about five street children in Medellín, who are looking for the Promised Land in the midst of a violent context: Colombia.
These two awards complement other performances by other Luxembourg co-productions, such as the feature filmBlanquitadirected byFernando Guzzoni, which won the"Best Screenplay"award in this year's Orriontzi section at theMostra di Venezia.
Blanquitais a co-production between Luxembourg (Tarantula Luxembourg), Chile, France and Poland. It tells the story of Blanca (18), who lives in a children's home run by the priest Manuel Cura (50).
Yet another internationally acclaimed co-production is the feature filmCorsage(Samsa Film). This biopic starring Vicky Krieps, has just won the "Best Film" award at the BFI London Film Festival. The co-production was directed byMarie Kreutzerand featuresLuxembourg actresses Vicky Kriepswho plays the famous Austro-Hungarian empress Elisabeth, known as Sissi,and Jeanne Werner.
Corsagewon the official selection "Un Certain Regard" - "Best Performance for Vicky Krieps" at this year'sCannes Film Festivaland was also recently part of the special presentations at the Toronto International Film Festival 2022.
The International Animation Film Festival awarded three Luxembourg co-productions, among them"Le Petit Nicolas, Qu'est-ce qu'on attend pour être heureux?", which won theCristal du Long-Métrage.
This animated film was co-produced by Lilian Eche and Christel Henon (BidibulProductions) and directed by Amandine Fredon and Benjamin Massoubre, based on the work ofRené GoscinnyandJean-Jacques Sempé.
Bettembourg's Philophon studios did the sound editing, sound effects and mixing, while the music for the film was recorded at the Luxembourg Philharmonic.
Le Petit Nicholas, Qu'est-ce qu'on attend pour être heureux? (Video/Audio)
The full-lenght feature filmDeuxdirected by Filippo Meneghetti, co-produced in Luxembourg by the company Tarantula (Donato Rotunno andElise André) won theCesar of the best first filmat the 46th Cesar awards ceremony in Paris.
The comedy-drama had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival and won dozens of international awards including Best First Film and Best Actress forMartine Chevalierand Barbara Sukowa, the film's two leads, at the 2021 "Lumières de la presse étrangère" award ceremony. The film is about a lesbian love story and is available on the Luxembourgish platformsooner.lu.
Deux (Video/Audio)
The filmHINTERLANDdirected byStefan Ruzowitzkyn, has been selected for several festivals and won theAudience Award at the Locarno Festival. The world premiere at the Piazza Grande in Locarno took place on 6th August before over 6,000 filmgoers and professionals. The original music forHINTERLANDwas composed by Kyan Bayani, a sound artist and composer from Luxembourg whose projects include fiction films and documentaries. The film was shot for the most part at the Filmland Studios in Kehlen.
HINTERLANDis set in 1920 Vienna, in the ruins of the Great War.Peter Berg, a former detective, comes back to his hometown after seven years of captivity as a prisoner of war. A stranger in a dark world of hunger and crime, he finds himself facing a murder mystery.
Hinterland (Video/Audio)
Last update07.11.2024
For more information
Lëtzebuerger Filmpräis
The top 10 of Luxembourg international cinema
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/luxembourgish-architecture.html
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Specific urban needs and an ever-renewing society are features of the architecture scene in the Grand Duchy.  Architects are focusing on clever solutions to deal with one of the most pressing questions: how do we want to live in the future? Their answer: quality of life, sustainable construction, and bespoke design are to come first!
Smart construction
Both at home and abroad, Luxembourg’s architects are creatingharmonious ensembles of traditional elements and contemporary stylesthat respect their cultural, social and stylistic contexts.
Town planning in the Grand Duchy does indeed have to face numerous challenges. The Grand Duchy and the Greater Region constitute one of the most densely populated regions in Europe. In its capacity as a real economic power, the Grand Duchy constantly needs more workspace and housing.
Style and beauty are combined in the new constructions ininnovative solutions that showcase new concepts while preserving traditional characteristics. Open-mindedness, a multiplicity of trends, and local skill based on a knowledge of state-of-the-art technology ensure maintenance of the quality of life in the Grand Duchy, which is one of the best in the world.
The Grand Duchy has taken the leadin building low-energy housing: since 2017, all new constructions are required to comply with the norms stipulated for achieving classification in Energy Class A, i.e. housing that consumes very little energy.Sustainability has become a major factor in the design and construction of buildings.All new constructions are designed with an eye to their ecological footprint, focusing on characteristics ranging from choice of materials to energy performance.
Biodiversum Haff Réimech, Remich
Valentiny hvp architects
© Brigida Gonzalez, Valentiny hvp architects
Biodiversum Haff Réimech, Remich
Valentiny hvp architects
© Brigida Gonzalez, Valentiny hvp architects
Centre national de l'audiovisuel, Dudelange
Paul Bretz Architectes Sàrl
© Lukas Roth, Cologne / Paul Bretz Architectes Sàrl
Nautical centre, Brussels Port
Beng Architectes Associés SA
© Serge Brison, Beng Architectes Associés SA
Nautical centre, Brussels Port
Beng Architectes Associés SA
© Serge Brison, Beng Architectes Associés SA
Domaine  Alice Hartmann, Wormeldange
dagli atelier d'architecture
© Joerg Hempel, dagli atelier d'architecture
Domaine  Alice Hartmann, Wormeldange
dagli atelier d'architecture
© Joerg Hempel, dagli atelier d'architecture
EHTCV, Cape Verde, Africa
Khoze Architecture Sàrl
© Khoze Architecture Sàrl
EHTCV, Cape Verde, Africa
Khoze Architecture Sàrl
© Khoze Architecture Sàrl
Gare Belval, University, Esch-sur-Alzette
Jim Clemes Associates
© Jim Clemes Associates
Gare Belval, University, Esch-sur-Alzette
Jim Clemes Associates
© Jim Clemes Associates
Gärten der Welt, Visitor Centre, Berlin, Germany
WW+ architektur + management sàrl
© Swen Eric Tornow, WW+ architektur + management sàrl
Gärten der Welt, Visitor Centre, Berlin, Germany
WW+ architektur + management sàrl
© Swen Eric Tornow, WW+ architektur + management sàrl
Hall Deich, Ettelbruck
Besch da Costa Architectes
© Ricardo Vaz Palma, Besch da Costa Architectes
Hall Deich, Ettelbruck
Besch da Costa Architectes
© Ricardo Vaz Palma, Besch da Costa Architectes
National museum of history and art, Luxembourg
Christian Bauer et Associés Architectes
© Lukas Roth, Cologne / Christian Bauer et Associés Architectes
Community centre Esch-sur-Sûre, Eschdorf
Ballinipitt architectes urbanistes
© BALLINIPITT architectes urbanistes
Community centre Esch-sur-Sûre, Eschdorf
Ballinipitt architectes urbanistes
© BALLINIPITT architectes urbanistes
Redevelopment of the former mill, Olingen
HSA Heisbourg Strotz Architectes
© Steve Troes Fotodesign, HSA Heisbourg Strotz Architectes
Redevelopment of the former mill, Olingen
HSA Heisbourg Strotz Architectes
© Steve Troes Fotodesign, HSA Heisbourg Strotz Architectes
Reservoir and water tank, Hivange
Georges Reuter Architectes Sàrl
© Georges Reuter Architectes Sàrl
Reservoir and water tank, Hivange
Georges Reuter Architectes Sàrl
© Georges Reuter Architectes Sàrl
Rives de Clausen, Luxembourg
Assar Architects
© Marc Detiffe, Assar Architects
Rives de Clausen, Luxembourg
Assar Architects
© Marc Detiffe, Assar Architects
Pomhouse, Centre national de l'audiovisuel, Dudelange
Kaell Architecte et Jim Clemes Associates
© Andres Lejona, Kaell Architecte
Water tower and pomhouse, Centre national de l'audiovisuel, Dudelange
Kaell Architecte et Jim Clemes Associates
© Romain Girtgen, Kaell Architecte
National and international reputation
There are many exemplary projects to be found throughout the Grand Duchy.Each region has a number of remarkable contemporary projects that combine the existing heritage with new architecture, taking the location into account or experimenting with a new type of facing.
And the Luxembourgish architects also 'export' themselves.Many emblematic buildings in other countries have been designed by firms of architects established in the Grand Duchy.They create magnificently modular buildings in terms of appearance and function that fit in with the various ecosystems and can be adapted to suit the preferences and needs of local residents and clients.
2020 has seen the sixth edition of theOAI Bauhärepräis. The prize is awarded every four years by the Grand Duchy'sOrder of Architects and Consulting Engineers(OAI) to private or public project owners.Emphasis is placed on quality projects and constructive, trusting relationships between project owners and designers. Awards are granted in nine categories, covering the work carried out by the five professions covered by the OAI.
TheLAA (Luxembourg Architecture Award)was launched in 1995 byLUCA (Luxembourg Center for Architecture).It is awarded to works and projects by architects, engineers, interior designers, landscapers and town planners, with the intention of encouraging professional creativity and the excellence of architectural production in the Grand Duchy. Members of the public are invited to contribute and vote for their favourite projects for the award of the  LAA Audience Award – the prize awarded by the public!
Since 2018, the Grand Duchy has exhibited at theInternational Architecture Exhibition at the Venice Biennalein a new environment that is both stimulating and demanding. TheLuxembourg Pavilionhas moved from the historic Ca' del Duca venue to take up quarters in a larger space in the Sale d'Armi right in the heart of Venice's Arsenal. With more than 240sq.m., the site makes it possible to envisage larger-scale presentations over the next twenty years, andsignificantly raise the profile of Luxembourgish architecture.  LUCA (Luxembourg Center for Architecture)  is in charge of organising the Grand Duchy's participation in the Biennale.
Last update12.02.2025
For more information
Sustainable development
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
Territory and Climate
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/dance-in-luxembourg.html
Dance in Luxembourg
In Luxembourg, people are very passionate about dance. Audiences and creators have been subject to constant change for some time now. The dance programmes in theatres and cultural centres offer national creations as well as international shows. Artists are in residency and training courses are available for professionals and enthusiasts alike.
Luxembourg Centre for choreographic creation -TROIS C-L
TheTROIS C-LisTHEplatform for contemporary dance in Luxembourg! It is funded by theMinistry of Cultureand theCity of Luxembourg, and has two main missions:
The '3 du Trois' of theTROIS C-Lis a unique opportunity for you to discover the sphere of choreography under various angles, as well as a multi-disciplinary programme. As part of these evenings – on the 3rd of each month – at the 'Banannefabrik' inBonnevoie, visual arts, music, performances, shows and conferences intertwine like in a motion research lab.
The innovative project 'Les Émergences' of the choreographic creation centre encompasses a support programme for contemporary creation and a set of performances open to the public. The aim is to put choreographers in the limelight and create bridges between creators and the audience.
TheTROIS C-Lis a member of theAerowaves – Dance across Europenetwork, which gives young choreographers the opportunity to showcase their creations on the stages of many European cities. In collaboration with theneimënster–NeumünsterAbbey Cultural Exchange Center, the TROIS C-L organises theAerowaves Dance Festival Luxembourg, which is devoted to the promotion of these labelled works.
A wide range of shows and performance venues
Dance is very much alive on stages all around the country. You will find a list of event venues and 'motion based' projects attached hereto.
In the centre:
In the south:
In the north:
You can even discover wonderful dance stories at thecinema. For example, the Bolshoi Ballet appears on the big screen with Giselle's thwarted loves, Corsaire's exotic adventures, the Nutcracker's magic or Swan Lake's tragedy.
Dance classes of all styles and levels
'I don't know how to dance!' No worries! Anyone can learn how to dance!
Whether it's afro dance, partner dance, dancesport, traditional or contemporary dance, or even urban dance, a large number of private dance schools or public institutions offer lessons to the young and old alike.
Classical, jazz or contemporary dance classes are available at the 'Conservatoire'. In-depth training is possible through secondary training in music, dance history, kinesiology or body expression.
Social dance lovers can take a peek on the website ofSwing Dance Luxembourg! This organisation's aim is to promote Lindy Hop and other swing dances in Luxembourg by organising dance classes, parties and workshops in various locations across the city.
The Ministry of Culture's strong support
In 2019, the Ministry of Culture launched theaid scheme for the structuring of recognised dance companies, whose objective is to support the professionalisation of the sector, alleviate professional creators in terms of administrative tasks and facilitate planning in the longer term.
With the Ministry's support, choreographic and theatre productions can take part inAvignon's OFF Festival. The festival took shape aroundAvignon festival, one of the largest performing arts festivals in the world. Each year, it transforms the city of Avignon into a pool of culture and creation.
The'Lëtzebuerger Danzpräis', a bi-annual Luxembourgish dance prize that has been awarded since 2011, which is aimed at encouraging contemporary choreographic creation or the artistic merit of a young dancer. In 2019, the prize was increased from 5,000€ to 10,000€ and the age limit of 35 years of age was abolished.
Last update17.04.2024
For more information
Artistic creation
Sports
Arts and culture
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/contemporary-artists.html
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
Luxembourg's artistic landscape has gone through a period of rapid changes in the past decades. As Luxembourg City was designated as the European capital of culture in 1995 and 2007, institutions dedicated to performing arts were established and the art scene became internationalised and emancipated. In 2022, a third cultural yearin Esch-sur-Alzette, guarantees the creative future and the presence of contemporary art and artists in the news!
7 contemporary artists you should know
It is not an option to present all Luxembourgish artists in this article, which is why we have compileda list of contemporary artistsfor you:
1.Marco Godinho, Luxembourgish artist of Portuguese origin, for whom thoughts and creating make one. His works -writing, drawing, installations or video- are a process.He represented Luxembourg at theVenice Contemporary Art Biennalewith the exhibition "Written by Water"in 2019.The project brought together all the themes that this artist was interested in: time, geography, migration, identity and language. He gave the sea a voice by putting notebooks in it so it could "write" in them, and then exhibited them as part of an installation alongside a video of the performance.
2. Su-Mei Tse, cosmopolitan artist from Europe and Asia who now works in Luxembourg and Berlin.She was awarded the Golden Lion of the Venice Biennale in 2003 for her exhibition in the Luxembourg Pavilion, "Air conditioned".Since then, her career path has gone beyond national borders, with exhibitions all over the world (Asia, Europe, United States, etc.), showcasing herinstallations, videos and sculptures. Her artworks are filled with questions on time, memories, musicality and language.The fountain"Many Spoken Words" is one of her "famous" works. It is part of the collection of theMUDAM Luxembourg - Musée d'art Grand-Duc Jean.
3. In the spring of 2020, the MUDAM Luxembourg also presented an exhibition of the Luxembourgish painterJean-Marie Biwer."D'après nature" brought together works from the past 15 years. They represented his work on landscapes, nature and his everyday environment.This exhibition brought to light 40 years of his career and is the first large-scale monographic exhibition to be featured in a Luxembourg museum.
4. Sophie Junglives and works in London and Basel. Her works present a dialogue betweentext, sculpture and performance. They move between form and feelings, pragmatisms and romanticism, peering into precision and magical enchantment.International exhibitions are planned in the United States, Switzerland and England. In 2013, Sophie Jung won theEdward SteichenAward.She also won theSwiss Art Award(2016 and 2019) and theManor Kunstpreis(2018). She is engaged as an external mentor at the Institute for Art, Design and Nature,HGK Basel, holds aLehrauftragfor performance at theAkademie der Bildenden Künste Karlsruheas a member of the board of theKunsthalle Basel.
5.The abstract artistEric Mangenis based in Luxembourg. He was interested ingraffitiin the late 1990s, which eventually led himto abstract painting, which is what he does today. After living in Barcelona for around six years, Eric Mangen returned to Luxembourg in 2013 and decided to work as a freelance artist in order to focus primarily on his artworks, including paintings and giant wall-painting projects. Thanks to his representation by way of his gallery based in Luxembourg (Valerius Art Gallery), several individual and collective exhibitions have taken place since 2017.His work makes giant strides, in particular as a result of major projects in the United States, Bosnia, Spain, France and Australia.
6.According to the site and context, thein situartworks ofClaudia Passeritake on social, political and environmental aspects. Claudia Passeri lives and works in Luxembourg and Perugia in Italy. She isa conceptual artist working with photography.She has exhibited herinstallationsand images on a regular basis in Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the United States.In 2019, she represented Luxembourg at the photography festivalRencontres de la photographiein Arlesvia the Luxembourg associationLët'z Arleswhich supports and promotes photography and artists related to Luxembourg.Her work, "Zeitgeist- Karl Cobain" is permanently installed in the café of the Luxembourg Casino.
7.Nora Wagnerlikes to play and experiment with everything that comes her way:  objects, humans, situations, etc. The location and context are the key of her artistic practice. She createsout-of-the box varied installations and performances: she travelled Europe as part ofatelier Nomad(2015) and organised a walk in the woods culminating in a guerrilla exhibition (The Walk, 2016). She was also the co-founder ofDKollektiv, the objective of which is to offer events and artistic and cultural projects at the Atelier D of Fondouq Hall in Dudelange.Her aim is therefore to make culture and art an integral part of everyday life. Nora Wagner won the 2019Edward Steichen Award, more specifically theEdward Steichen Luxembourg Resident in New York Award, which includes a four-month residency at theISCP - International Studio & Curatorial Programin New York.
Last update23.05.2025
For more information
Artistic creation
A tour of Luxembourg museums
Edward Steichen
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/multilingual-literature.html
Multilingual literature
Multilingualism is the strength of Luxembourgers, as their literature also reveals. Luxembourgish, French, German, Italian, English - Luxembourg's literature speaks many languages, just like its authors.
Languages for everybody
Luxembourg has benefited fromlinguistic influencesacross the centuries. French-German ones initially, followed by Italian, Portuguese and English ones. Luxembourgish society's openness in the face of other languages - which comes across as obvious in everyday life - has been of great benefit for Luxembourg's many authors. In Luxembourg, authors find their audience of readers by writing in the language they are the most passionate about. Although Luxembourgish, French and German remain the most popular languages, other languages such as Italian also find readers in Luxembourg.
The majority of authors expresses themselves in a preferred language. This is the case of Jean Portante, for example, who writes in French, or of Claudine Muno, Nico Helminger or Jemp Schuster whose language of expression is Luxembourgish. However, it is not rare forauthors to switch languages between their works, as is the case with Anise Koltz, Guy Rewenig, Carine Krecké or Lambert Schlechter.
Children's books are also available in various languages. German is the most widely used language in this field, but a large number of Luxembourgish works do exist, whether they are original Luxembourgish texts or translations of foreign books.
Luxemburgensia
As a result, it is impossible to define Luxembourg's literature as purely "Luxembourgish". In fact, the diversity of languages mirrors Luxembourg's rich language context. Taken as a whole, this polyphonic production can be summed up by the collective termLuxemburgensia, an expression which stands for everything written, printed or composed by Luxembourgers, in Luxembourg or about Luxembourg, regardless of the language used.
Discover the universe of Luxembourg's literary scene in our brochure "About... Literature in Luxembourg".
Last update24.09.2025
For more information
Anne-Marie Reuter wins the Servais prize
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/classic-music-luxembourg.html
Classical music for you to enjoy
Read the story
Classical music in Luxembourg is a vibrant and integral part of the country's cultural landscape, showcasing a diverse array of performances, festivals, and renowned musicians. The Grand Duchy has made significant strides in promoting classical music through various institutions and events, making it a hub for both local and international talent.
Venues – from contemporary infrastructures to living heritage
Luxembourg's cultural venues aremany, diverse and spread over the entire country.
Notable venues include:
These venues not only host classical music events but alsoencourage a broader appreciation for the arts, making them vital to Luxembourg's cultural ecosystem.
Moreover,Luxembourg's national music schools, the "Conservatoires" play a crucial role in the classical music education landscape, hosting numerous concerts throughout the year. These institutions nurture young musicians and provide them with opportunities to perform, thereby contributing to the development of future talent in the classical music scene:
If you are looking for more intimate settings, manylocal cultural centres, churches and other venues host concerts and festivals, with backdrops as diverse as the performances.
Festivals – celebrating classical music
In addition to the year-round programme, a number ofevents showcasing different styles of classical music are taking place each year, including:
Such events do not only highlight local talent but also feature internationally acclaimed artists, enriching the country's cultural fabric.
Young audiences – enjoying classical music from an early age
In all this offer,young audiences have a special place. The Philharmonie'sKid's Philprogramme caters especially to children and adolescents of various age groups, with events ranging from concerts and plays for older children to workshops for toddlers, designed to introduce them to music, movement and creativity.
Many more smaller cultural institutions throughout the country also have youth programmes worth checking out, for instance:
Join Luxembourg’s vibrant classical music scene and enjoy its many facets.
Dernière modification le31.10.2025
Pour en savoir plus
Rock, Pop, et cetera - popular music genres
Dance in Luxembourg
Concert halls: an overview
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/luxembourgish-writers.html
Luxembourgish writers and their works: a short history
Contemporary Luxembourgish literature is highly creative. Although literature in Luxembourgish is not a long-standing tradition, the country can boast many Luxembourgish writers who write in their mother tongue. Here are a few tips to discover Luxembourgish literature.
Early beginnings
Luxembourg's literary history is rather short: thefirst work in Luxembourgish was published in 1829. It was entitledE’ Schrek op de’ Lezebuerger Parnassusand was written by Anton Meyer, a mathematics teacher.
It was the era of three authors who are now considered as theclassics of the Luxembourgish language:
The renaissance in the late 20th Century
Theperiod of the early 1980sis often considered as the real starting point for contemporary Luxembourgish literature.
This was when the general publicdiscovered a number of new  voices, such asLambert Schlechter,Jean Portante,Michèle Thoma,Nico HelmingerandGeorges Hausemer, while already established authors were starting to look for other ways of expressing themselves. Man in his social environment features at the centre of the literary output of this period.
The renaissance of novels in Luxembourgish saw the light in 1985 with the publication ofHannert dem Atlantik–Guy Rewenig's first novel in Luxembourgish. The novel revolves around the life of Jhemp Medinger, an unqualified worker in Luxembourg's industrial South.
In Rewenig’s wakeRoger Manderscheidpublished a major trilogy in 1988, comprising the novelsschacko klak,de papagei um käschtebamandfeier a flam.
Discover the universe of Luxembourg's literary scene in our brochure 'About... Literature in Luxembourg'.
Since the late 1980s,books in Luxembourgish have been very popularwith the  public, reaching significant sales figures. More sagas inLëtzebuergeschwere published over the following decade, by authors of the likes of Nico Helminger,Josiane Kartheiser,Jhemp HoscheitandJosy Braun.
During this period there was also arenaissance of literature in Frenchin the Grand Duchy; the main authors wereEdmond Dune, Jean Portante,Anise Koltz, Lambert Schlechter,Rosemarie Kieffer,José Ensch,Jean Sorrente,Félix Molitor, andDanielle Hoffelt.
The same is true of recentLuxembourg literature in German, which  attempts to blend into the dominant currents of the German-speaking world. Names such asJean Krier,Roland Harsch,Pit HoeroldandGuy Helmingerbecome household names of quality literature.
Young women writers such asLinda Grafand particularlyClaudine Munoare worthy representatives of this promising rising generation of authors.
Children's literature
Children's literature in Luxembourgishis particularly appreciated as a genre. Guy Rewenig stands out as a pioneer in children's literature in Luxembourgish; hisMuschkiluschcollection of stories was published in 1990.
Other popular authors, including Roger Manderscheid and Jhemp Hoscheit, have tried their hand at writing for children and teenagers – a successful exercise to judge by their sometimes impressive sales.
Graphic novels and comic strips
In the comics genre, manyforeign works have been translated into the Luxembourgish language, joined by a growing number of Luxembourgish productions.
I.e.Deemols(In days gone by) byMarc Angelis a history of the Grand Duchy in the style of comic-strip. Andy Geenen has produced a fictional comic-strip story about John the Blind (the King of Bohemia) entitledDe Leschte Ritter(The last knight).
The great classic of the genre in the Grand Duchy is without a doubt the series entitledDe Superjhemp. The authors Lucie Czuga and Roger Leiner recount the incredible adventures of a very Luxembourgish Superman... Comics classics such as Asterix and Tintin have also been adapted in Luxembourgish.
The comic-strip genre comes to the fore inJuly each year, with the International Comics Festival(Festival international de la bande dessinée de Contern) held in Contern For the duration of the festival, the whole village is devoted to this art and attracts thousands of visitors as well as the stars of this genre.
(Source: About … Literature in Luxembourg)
Last update04.10.2024
For more information
Multilingual literature
Anne-Marie Reuter wins the Servais prize
Top 5: iconic characters from Luxembourgish fiction
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/musiques-populaires.html
Rock, Pop, et cetera - popular music genres
Many artists that are famous beyond the borders come from the Grand Duchy, such as Seed to Tree, Edsun or Dream Catcher. These pop bands and singers perform on stage on many occasions throughout the year.
The place(s) to be!
Pop music fans will really enjoy Luxembourg' smany concert halls and festivals!
In August each year, the freeE-Lakefestival on the shores of Echternach Lakeattracts over 20,000 people for a whole weekend. TheFête de la musiquefeatures a large number of concerts across the country. It is an event that fans of pop, rock and electronic music never want to miss.
You can immerse yourself in the world of music at theRockhal concert hall throughout the year, a key venue for pop and rock music in Luxembourg. It is an essential stop for every internationally acclaimed artist's European tour! Here are some of the venues:
Find other venues on our page about classical music.
These large infrastructures might be well-known, but off the beaten path aremany cafes and bars which regularly host concerts, such asDe Gudde WëllenorOp der Bréck.
Promotion and networking
Nowadays, pop music is an important part of our society and culture.Kultur | lx- Arts Council Luxembourgis the support, promotion and dissemination tool of the Luxembourg cultural scene. The association enables Luxembourg artists and groups to establish themselves on the national and international scene and to create new contacts. It also offers financial support for their tours and appearances worldwide!
SACEM, the Grand Duchy's society of music writers and composers, busies itselfnot only with billing the media broadcasting out of the Grand Duchy for copyright and relatedfees, but also more particularly with the management and wider use of the Luxembourgish repertoire.
Dernière modification le04.10.2024
Pour en savoir plus
Classical music for you to enjoy
Hip-hop in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation/edward-steichen-photography-luxembourg.html
Edward Steichen
The Steichen Collections Luxembourg bring together heritage items connected with the long and varied career of Edward J. Steichen (1879-1973), with a particular emphasis on photography. A number of public collections provide evidence of his prolific work both as a photographer and as an exhibition curator for the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York: the collections held byMusée national d'archéologie, d'histoire et d'art(MNAHA), the City of Luxembourg, and the Grand Duchy's National Audiovisual Centre (Centre national de l'audiovisuel- CNA).
As a tribute to his country of origin,Steichen bequeathed a large part of his work to the Grand Duchy: the famous exhibition "The Family of Man" (1955) in Clervaux and the collection "The Bitter Years" (1962) in Dudelange illustrate his work as curator at the MoMA, while the collection held by the MNAHA, which can be viewed free of charge in the city centre in theNationalmusée um Fëschmaart, represents a cross-section of his career as a photographer.
In Luxembourg City it is also possible to view some of Steichen's photographs in theAm Tunnelgallery at theBanque et caisse d’épargne de l’État, where a permanent display area is devoted to his work.
Edward Steichen (1879-1973)
Edward Steichen was born in Bivange on 27 March 1879, and left his native country in 1881 when his family emigrated to the United States. Steichen began taking photographs at the age of 16, going on to become one of the most famous photographers of the twentieth century.
From 1922 to 1937, Steichen worked as head photographer atCondé Nast(which publishes Vanity Fair andVogue), producing an impressive number of portraits of celebrities.From 1947 to 1962, he was Director of the Department of Photography at theMuseum of Modern Art(MOMA) in New York, where he curated 44 exhibitions.
In 1963, when he met Grand Duchess Charlotte at the White House during her State visit, Steichen introduced himself ase Lëtzebuerger Jong(a Luxembourgish boy).
Steichen passed away in Connecticut in 1973, shortly before his 94th birthday.
The Bitter Years - CNA
"The Bitter Years" is a tribute to documentary photography, bringing together more than200 images from one of the largest collective projects in the history of photography: the documentation of rural America during the Great Depression by the Farm Security Administration.
Created in 1962 by Eward Steichen for the Museum of Modern Art in New York (MoMA), the collection was exhibited between 2012 and 2020 in theWaassertuermgallery, a former water tower, which is located next to theNational Audiovisual Centrein Dudelange. After its closure in December 2020, making way for new projects, it will be housed in the CNA archives, where it will be analysed and appraised with a view to its further appearance.
The Family of Man - CNA
"The Family of Man" is acollection of 503 photographs by 273 artists from 68 countries, compiled by Edward Steichen for the MoMA. The exhibition, first presented in 1955, is intended to serve as a manifesto for peace and the fundamental equality of mankind, through post-war humanist photography.
After a world tour of more than 150 museums, the final, complete version of the exhibition wasinstalled permanently in Clervaux Castle in 1994. The exhibition was placed onUNESCO's Memory of the World Registerin 2003.
Nationalmusée um Fëschmaart: Steichen - The Photographer
Steichen was known for his work as Director of the Department of Photography at the MoMA in New York, but he was also a major figure in the history of photography: his personal work marks the passage from pictorialism to straight photography.
The MNAHA devotes one room exclusively to Edward Steichen's photographic production, with acollection of 178 photographs representative of his careerthat the artist bequeathed to the Luxembourg State in 1985. TheMNAHAalso holds and displays thecollection owned by the Luxembourg City'sPhotographic Library, comprising 44 photographs by Steichen.
For conservation reasons, the full set of 222 photographs can be viewed in two-monthly cycles, each exhibition presenting about twenty photographs arranged by theme.
Edward Steichen Award Luxembourg
TheEdward Steichen Award Luxembourgis a contemporary art prize set up in 2004 to mark the 125th anniversary of Edward Steichen's birth. It is awarded every two years, and gives a young European artist the opportunity to undertake a residency in New York.
Last update07.10.2024
For more information
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
From graffiti to street art in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/verwurrelter.html
Verwurrelter: the knotted treat for Carnival season
In Luxembourg, Carnival andVerwurreltergo hand in hand. These knot-shaped pastries, fried in oil and sprinkled with sugar are the perfect winter energy boost. This simple recipe is offered to you by theÉcole d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg.
Verwurrelter: a confusing sweet treat?
These sweet delights, which are inextricably linked to Carnival, have a very peculiar name. It originates from the Luxembourgish verb "verwurrelen" which, according to theLëtzebuerger Online Dictionnaire, literally means to get tangled up (i.e. to tie yourself in knots or to become confused). Their knotted form could be said to represent the confusion or craziness of the Carnival season.
In any case, don’t let the name discourage you: with this recipe from theÉcole d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourgyou won’t get yourself in a tangle while making them.
The recipe from theÉcole d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg
Ingredients for 6 people
Method
About theÉcole d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg(EHTL)
TheÉcole d’Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg(EHTL) is the only institute in Luxembourg to offer full-time training in hospitality and courses in tourism. It has been based in Diekirch since it was founded in 1949. In 2017 it adopted the motto "Striving for excellence". Students not only become proficient in catering, hospitality and tourism; they are also given the soft skills they need to successfully pursue their chosen profession.
Interested in trying out other recipes from the school? Check out their books:
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
Fuesent: masked balls and cavalcades
Nonnefäscht: sweet treats for carnival
Culinary delights
Pied de page
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/nonnefaescht.html
Nonnefäscht: sweet treats for carnival
Nonnefäscht– literally "nuns' farts" – are a favourite treat at carnival time, providing a much-needed energy boost before the fasting of Lent begins. The high energy content of these little dough balls can be explained by the fact that they are fried in oil and dredged in icing sugar. They are a delicious treat at any time of day, especially if eaten while still warm.
Nonnefäscht: how did the little puffs earn the name "nuns' farts"?
These sweet treats eaten during the carnival period in Luxembourg have a most peculiar name: they are known as "nuns' farts" (or "pets-de-nonne"in French). The etymology of the name is unclear, and there are several legends to explain it.
The most likely explanation is that they are so light and fluffy that they disappear almost like a "puff of air". The "Dictionnaire de l'Académie des gastronomes", published in 1962, seems to confirm this version, linking the name to the lightness of the buns: "Nuns' farts should be eaten hot, to make sure they retain all the lightness that gave them their name."
The comical name is also said to come from the fact that they were first invented in monasteries. Alternatively it might have been a way of poking fun at nuns and the church, because the buns are associated with a religious festival.
Linguists, however, believe that the name comes from a mediaeval spelling.
Regardless of where it comes from, don't let yourself be put off by it, as these little puffs are delicious – and we can share a typical Luxembourgish recipe with you so that you can try them for yourself.
The recipe from theÉcole d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg
TheÉcole d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg(EHTL) recommends this recipe:
Ingredients for 4 to 6 people
Nonnefäscht: ingrédients et progression de la recette
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Nonnefäscht
©EHTL
Method
About the École d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg (EHTL)
TheÉcole d’Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg(EHTL) is the only institute in Luxembourg to offer full-time training in hospitality and courses in tourism. It has been based in Diekirch since it was founded in 1949. In 2017 it adopted the motto "Striving for excellence". Students not only become proficient in catering, hospitality and tourism; they are also given the soft skills they need to successfully pursue their chosen profession.
Interested in trying out other recipes from the school? Check out their books:
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
Fuesent: bals masqués et cavalcades
Verwurrelter: les noeuds gourmands du carnaval
A table
Pied de page
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/stollen.html
Christmas stollen
With its fragrant candied fruit, buttery dough and soft marzipan centre, Stollen (or "Christstollen") is a Christmas classic that is also hugely popular in Luxembourg. While people in Stolzembourg in northern Luxembourg have their own special stollen tradition, others prefer to bake theirs at home according to family recipes. So if you're in the mood for something sweet, put on your apron and reach for the flour – we've got a delicious recipe for you to try at home!
A classic Christmas treat
Christmas stollen is a popular festive bake enjoyed mainly throughout the German-speaking world at Christmas time. Originating in 15th-century Dresden and influenced by the culinary traditions of neighbouring countries, stollen has also become a cherished part of Christmas in Luxembourg.
The loaf-shaped stollen, said to resemble the baby Jesus wrapped in cloth, is made from a rich, aromatic yeast dough and, depending on local custom, filled with candied fruit, raisins or marzipan. With its thick dusting of icing sugar, it looks almost like it's been dipped in fresh snow. This sweet treat is often enjoyed with coffee or tea. But unlike many other baked goods, Christmas stollen is not for the impatient: although the ingredients are quickly kneaded together, it is the resting stage that makes it truly special. Only after several days – or even weeks – does it develop its unmistakable Christmas flavour. And the rich, buttery sweetness and delicate hint of vanilla make the wait even more worthwhile.
Stollen from the "Stollen"
In the village ofStolzembourg, situated within theOur Nature Parkin the Our Valley, this traditional Christmas treat takes on a unique twist. The stollen is not stored in a bakery, but rather in the village's former copper mine – quite literally, in a "Stollen" (the Luxembourgish word for a mine tunnel)! The idea came from the project initiators of the Stolzembourg Syndicat d'Initiative (tourist office), who were inspired by the "Christstollen" of the Ore Mountains, where some bakeries use former mine tunnels as natural maturation chambers.
The "Stollen aus dem Stollen" are baked by thetraditional bakery Au Croissant d'Orin Vianden, according to an old family recipe. Immediately after baking, the loaves are wrapped in tinfoil and placed in the copper mine to mature for three weeks. The constant temperatures and steady humidity underground create ideal conditions for the flavours to unfurl. After maturing, the loaves are carefully packed and can be pre-ordered from the Syndicat d'Initiative Stolzembourg ahead of the festive season.
The galleries of thecopper mine in Stolzembourg– the only one of its kind in Luxembourg – are open to the public. Fifty metres below ground, curious visitors can learn more about the history of copper mining in the Grand Duchy. And since 2019, the delicious "Stollen aus dem Stollen" can also been found there.
Let the Christmas baking begin – a delicious recipe to try at home:
Craving a slice of stollen after reading all about it? Together with the Au Croissant d'Or bakery, we have put together a "Christstollen" recipe that you can easily bake at home. And you won't have to wait weeks to enjoy it – your stollen will be ready to eat in just a few days. So put on your apron and preheat the oven!
Easy Christmas stollen recipe
Makes: approx. 1 large loaf (900–1,000g)
Dough500g wheat flour (type 550 or 405)60g sugar1 packet vanilla sugar1 cube fresh yeast (42g)250ml lukewarm milk100g soft butter1 medium-sized egg1 pinch of salt1 tsp lemon zest (optional)Filling150g raisins50g candied orange peel (optional)50g candied lemon peel (optional)(or 150g extra raisins)To finish80g butter (melted)80–100g icing sugar
Dough
Filling
To finish
Claude Müller bakes traditional Luxembourgish pastries and bread at his bakery Au Croissant d'Or in Vianden, northern Luxembourg, according to family recipes. Besides classic stollen, those with a sweet tooth will also find special variations made with red spelt, and even a gluten-free version.
Last update15.12.2025
For more information
The Christmas log
Boxemännchen
Galette des rois - Dräikinnekskuch
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/menu-noel-2025-capon-traditionnel.html
Recipe by Anne Faber
Stuffed Christmas capon: recipe by Anne Faber
Lisez l'article
This holiday season, let yourself be seduced by a Christmas classic, a festive meal that is to gastronomy what "Last Christmas" is to Christmas songs: stuffed capon accompanied by potatoes cooked in goose fat and sautéed Brussels sprouts, all prepared according to the expertise of Luxembourg's food blogging and culinary media icon Anne Faber.
The festive season is fast approaching and you still haven't decided on a Christmas menu for your guests? So why not get cooking and prepare a meal worthy of the greatest chefs?
To think outside the box, leave the traditional turkey aside and opt forcapon, a generous, tender and tasty bird, perfect for delighting your guests' palates.
To guide you on this adventure,Luxembourg food blogging icon Anne Fabershares her festive recipe for this bird for Christmas. Those who know her know that she elevates culinary products by adding her own personal touch. For this recipe, she serves it with crispy potatoes cooked in goose fat and Brussels sprouts.
With this recipe, Anne Faber shows us that a Christmas menu can combine tradition and creativity, transforming your meal into an unforgettable experience. We hope you enjoy this festive main course andwish you a good meal and a Merry Christmas!
3kg capon1 onion½ lemon4 garlic cloves30g melted butter, for brushingsalt and pepper
1 tbsp butter, for frying1 onion, peeled and chopped1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed200g pork mince2 tsp dried sage (if you can get smoked sage, do!)50g breadcrumbs1 apple, grated1 eggsalt and pepper
1 tbsp flour, for the gravy
2kg floury potatoes150g goose fat4 sprigs rosemary5 garlic clovessalt
750g brussels sprouts1 tbsp olive oil5 slices pancetta1 tsp fennel seeds1 garlic clove2 tbsp Worcester saucesalt and pepper
Dish preparation:
For the goose-fat potatoes:
For the Brussels sprouts:
Last update12.12.2025
For more information
Christmas - a time of togetherness
The Christmas log
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/recipe-buche-log-christmas-new-year-luxembourg.html
The Christmas log
The log is a cake with which the Christmas or New Year's meal in Luxembourg comes to an end. Its origin is linked to a rite celebrated at the winter solstice. On the longest night of the year, a huge log was burned. This custom has existed since the Middle Ages and was spread throughout Europe. Today, it is mainly the sweet tooth that "burns" for the delicacy. The Luxembourg School of Hotel Management and Tourism (École d'Hôtellerie et de Tourisme du Luxembourg) offers you two recipes to make your own: the classic and the vegan one!
Quickfact:
The Luxembourg Hotel and Tourism School is the only establishment in the Grand Duchy to offer full-time training in the hotel and catering industry and education in the field of tourism. The school, located in Diekirch, focuses on the relational and behavioural skills of the hospitality industry. The young graduates therefore benefit from professional skills and personal qualities in their future profession. A recipe for success!
Find out more about the EHTLhere.
The classic log
Recipe suggested by Ronny Thill, pastry chef and technical teacher at the EHTL
Buttercream recipe
Progression for buttercream
Rolled biscuit recipe
Progression for the biscuit
Bûche
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Bûche
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Classic yule log
© EHTL
Assembly and decoration
The vegan log 2022 edition
Recipe suggested by Carole Goerend, pastry chef and technical teacher at the EHTL
Roasted pears recipe
Progression for the roasted pears
Chocolate biscuit recipe
Progression for the chocolate biscuit
Chocolate cream recipe
Progression for the chocolate cream
Assembly and decoration
Bon appétitand happy Christmas!
Did you know?
Mmmmh! The Luxembourg School of Hospitality and Tourism has published a book of exclusively plant-based recipes (in French and English), responding to the demand of a whole generation consciously eating well to preserve their health and that of our planet. It contains 59 plant-based recipes, almost 100% vegan, devised by the teaching chefs Steve Lentz for savoury and Carole Goerend for sweet. Do you want to change your plate and your taste? The book is available in bookshops or can be ordered from the EHTL.
More informationhere!
Last update02.03.2023
For more information
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Christmas - a time of togetherness
Gastronomic heritage
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/gromperekichelcher.html
Gromperekichelcher
Gromperekichelcher are one of Luxembourg’s most beloved specialties: this simple but tasty dish is eaten at popular festivals and fairs across the Grand Duchy. These potato patties are fried in oil, eaten warm and usually served with apple sauce and a sprinkling of salt. However, the simplicity of the dish opens the doors to many variations.
In Luxembourg, you're bound to findGromperekichelcherat local festivals and markets. Thefried potato pancakes are a traditional dish in Luxembourg, where they are savoured at major public events, such as on the market of thepilgrimage of the'Oktav', and during festivities on the eve of theNational Dayand at theSchueberfouer,the huge fun fair, as well as at the country's Christmas markets.
Even though the roots of the Gromperekichelcher lie in Luxembourg's rural and farming past,many contemporary variations have added a little variety and versatility to this dish. Traditionally, they are served withsalt and apple sauce, but the simplicity of the dish gives you the opportunity to create your own culinary twist to this recipe. Whether served as a side dish with soup or as a main course with fresh cream and dill, they are equally delicious!
Did we whet your appetite? If you cannot wait for the next official opportunity to cherish this delightful dish, don't worry...you can prepare this tasty treat yourself.
Ingredients:
(for four to six people)
Preparation:
Last update15.06.2021
Gastronomic heritage
Cuisine? International.
AOP – guaranteed good wines
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/boxemaennchen.html
Boxemännchen
What can you find in Luxembourg during Advent? The famousBoxemännchen. These little brioche men are a sweet symbol of Saint Nicholas and delight both children and adults. Traditionally placed on the plate offered by the patron saint of children, they are a cherished part of the festive season. Fancy baking them yourself? We asked author and chef Maischi Tibesart to share her original recipe – which you'll find below.
During Advent,Boxemännchenare everywhere in Luxembourg – you'll spot them in every bakery. These brioche figures are decorated with raisins, sweets, or even a littlemeerschaumpipe, and they bring festive joy to breakfast tables and gift plates alike. They sweeten the wait forSaint NicholasandChristmas, becoming a cherished part of the seasonal anticipation. Typically glazed and measuring between 10 and 30 cm, they also come in larger family-sized versions, some coated in chocolate or sprinkled with sugar. If you’d like to try making them yourself, here's the original recipe from Maischi Tibesart.
Ingredients:
Method:
From:E Maufel Lëtzebuerg-Mit Maischi unterwegs in der Luxemburger Küche
© Maischi Tibesart /ÉditionsGuy Binsfeld
The author
Maischi Tibesart's claim is to conveyLuxembourg's "very own feeling of home". Her dishes take one back to theroots of Luxembourg cuisine, and also to her own prepared in the hostel "Méchelshaff" in Echternach. Of course, therecipes are very important to her, as are the stories behind them. She talks about both in her cookbook titled "E Maufel Lëtzebuerg"(A bite of Luxembourg), available in French and German.
Last update27.11.2025
For more information
Verwurrelter: the knotted treat for Carnival season
Cuisine? International.
Galette des rois - Dräikinnekskuch
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/aop-protected-quality.html
AOP – guaranteed good wines
How do you recognise high quality wines? The "Appellation d'origine protégée" (AOP) label guarantees the quality and origin of Luxembourg's Moselle wines. It ensures strict controls throughout the production process, offering consumers a unique taste of the region's winemaking expertise. André Mehlen, from the Wine Institute, shares insights into this certification system.
Mister Mehlen, what exactly is the AOP about?
AOP products come from a defined geographical region. Thequality of these products lies in their origins and the expertise of its producers. In other words, AOP products have to be from the region and have to be produced within the region.
Which regions does Luxembourg’s AOP for Moselle wines include?
The "AOP - Moselle luxembourgeoise” includesvineyards from Schengen on the French border up to Wasserbillig, as well as vineyards near Rosports. The perimeter defines exactly which vineyards may produce AOP wines.
What sets these wines so apart that they would need an AOP?
The AOP wines "Moselle luxembourgeoise"have their typicality, their style. Of course, the AOP "Moselle luxembourgeoise" lacks the notoriety of French regions such as theBourgogneorBordeaux– we are too small for that. Nonetheless, the quality of our products more than matches theirs. In order to underline the quality of these wines and of course out of respect for the winemakers and their dedication, these products deserve an AOP.
Is there any characteristics which links all of the AOP wines?
Typical for Luxembourg is the many different varieties.What they all excell in, is their minerality and fruitiness.
What sets the AOP apart from other labels?
The AOP labels are regulated by the EU, i.e. the European Commission set the conditions for them. Once these are fulfilled, theAOP benefits from a protection on the European level and is submitted to controls. The control itself is made by the member state – contrary to certain private labels.
Does the "AOP - Moselle luxembourgeoise" include other products apart from wines?
Still wines – white, rosé and red –, theCrémant de Luxembourgand specialty wines such as late-harvested wines, straw wines and ice wines fall under the AOP.
If they satisfy the criteria of the specifications, succeed an analytical and an organoleptic exam, only then can these products use the "AOP - Moselle luxembourgeoise" label.
You just mentionedCrémant, Luxembourg’s sparkling wine – what is this anyway?
Crémantis, just like Champagne, aquality sparkling wine. Only AOP wines can be used to create aCrémant, according to a very precisely defined production method. EveryCrémantundergoes a bottle fermentation, after which it rests on yeast. This period lasts at least 9 months or, for one of the prizedCrémant millésimé, 24 months. Only then can you buy the AOPCrémant.
Crémantis quite recent by the way – it has existed since 1991. Originally, its use was protected for 7 French regions and Luxembourg. Before 1991, Luxembourgers called their products ‘Schampes’ (the Luxembourgish word for Champagne). In 1991 however, usage of the term ‘champagne method’ was prohibited outside of the Champagne region. The term ‘Crémant’ was not in use, and could be used by the other French regions and Luxembourg.
Is there a difference in taste between Champagne andCrémant?
There are a few noticeable differences:
The Luxembourg Moselle enjoys a different soil and climate from the Champagne.
Moreover, Luxembourg allows more varieties than the Champagne. For example, LuxembourgCrémantcan be made from Riesling, something that can't be done in the Champagne. Of course, that means that theCrémant'sflavours are different from its Champagne counterpart.
Mr. Mehlen, thank you very much for your time.
Last update21.08.2024
For more information
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
Sustainable wines in the making
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/cremant-de-luxembourg.html
Crémant
Crémant de Luxembourgis a sparkling wine made from local grapes, renowned for its quality since 1991. Available in various styles, it’s perfect for celebrations or casual gatherings. Enjoy its effervescence chilled and discover the elegance of this exquisite wine from the Moselle region.
What is crémant?
Crémantis sparkling wine made from the best grapes of the Luxembourg vineyards. It differs from traditional sparkling wines by specific criteria, including good sound character and perfect ripeness of the grapes, which are transported without being crushed.Crémantsmay be of a single variety, but also blends and vintages.
Crémantsareserved as apéritif or at festive events and are a real treat. They agree with almost any food, from startes to deserts, but also as stand-alone beverage at receptions or when having some friends over.
Crémantshould be served chilled. The ideal serving temperature is 6 to 8° C. It should be stored in a dry and chilly basement with a constant temperature between 10 and 12° C. The bottles should be lying down, so that the cork is in permanent contact with the wine.
Guaranteed quality
Theexceptional quality of 'Crémant de Luxembourg' is guaranteedby the members of the tasting committee of the National Office of the AOC serving on the Board of the National Wine Brand (Commission de la Marque nationale du vin). The corks bear the inscription 'Crémant de Luxembourg' and the rectangular label on the back of the bottle marked 'Marque Nationale — Appellation contrôlée Crémant de Luxembourg', whichcertifies the origin and quality of the wine, under the control of the state.
Conditions for using the name 'Crémant' are strictly controlled (excerpt):
Differentcuvées
There are alsodifferentcuvéesof sparkling wines, which are produced from Luxembourg wines:
Last update22.08.2024
For more information
Beers in Luxembourg
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/beers-in-luxembourg.html
Beers in Luxembourg
Whether it's on a night out, for a relaxed evening at home or for a festive occasion – Luxembourgers love their beer! The country's beer brewing tradition goes back to at least the 1300s, and today this beverage remains a favourite. Recently, craft beers have reached the Luxembourg market, and with this trend a number of small breweries have sprung up to create a host of fine beers for every taste.
What can you expect?
The major brands available in Luxembourg areBofferdingandBattin, owned by theBrasserie Nationalebrewery, as well asDiekirchandMousel, brewed by theBrasserie de Luxembourg, andSimonandOurdaller, brewed byBrasserie Simon.These breweries produce mainly lager beers, i.e. light beers with a more or less pronounced bittery note.
You will find these beers for sale in any outlet, and all of the cafés and restaurants will serve one of them. However, many of the latter have a contract with a specific brewery, i.e. only sell a certain brand of the local beers, which is easily recognisable if you look at the sign outside.
Although Luxembourg was definitely not among the first countries to join thecraft beer trend, it has had a deep impact on the beverage.
Lëtzebuergesch for beer lovers:
Wéi ee Béier hutt Dir vum Faass? (Which beer have you got on tap?)
Ee Mini wannechgelift(OneMini, please)
Prost! (Cheers!)
More Luxembourgish expressions here:An Intro toLëtzebuergesch
However, alarge number of microbreweries have recently sprung up, and the traditional breweries have reacted to this by diversifying their own selection of beers. It's not uncommon these days to find IPAs, Belgian-style fruity beers, vegan or low-caloric beers from both, large companies and small microbreweries.
While the establishments usually are going to have only Luxembourgish beers on tap,many other beer nations are well represented in the country.
GermanWeizenbeers(a type of wheat beer) are very popular, as none of the local breweries produces this style of beer. You are also certainly going to meetselections of Belgian beers, as Luxembourgers have also discovered their taste for the heavier, darker abbey beers of our neighbours. Due to the large Portuguese community, a selection ofPortuguese beersare also readily available in most supermarkets and some local cafés. Finally, aselection of Irish and English beersare served in Irish or English-style pubs in Luxembourg, which cater to the large expat community from the isles.
Beers in all sizes
So, what are you going to order?
Beer comes in many shapes and sizes, which reflects the popularity of the beverage in Luxembourg:
And when do you order a beer in Luxembourg?
Luxembourgers may order aMiniat any occasion. This could just as well be a posh reception (although theCrémantis more common here) as it could be an evening among friends or a night out clubbing. In a restaurant, wines are usually served with the different dishes, butbeer is popular for aperitifsand, accompanied by a locally-distilled schnapps, as a digestif. Sometimes, you'll also hear a 'Picon' beer ordered, which is basically beer with an orange-based bitter – very tasty, but also somewhat stronger, so be careful.
Where can I get more information on beers?
There aretwo museums in Luxembourg dedicated to Luxembourg's beers, and both are really worth visiting:
Some breweries have offers for visitors, e.g.Bofferding'sguided tours andDiekirch'sprivate museum.
Even so, the best way to get more information about Luxembourg's beers is to sit down on one of Luxembourg's many terraces or enter one of its many cafés and sample the results of a 700 year-old brewing tradition.
As we Luxembourgers say:Prost!
Last update02.06.2023
For more information
Going out in the evening
Culinary delights
Michelin Guide Luxembourg 2025: Michelin-starred restaurants and Bib Gourmand
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/gastronomic-heritage-ketty-thull.html
Gastronomic heritage
Catherine, who goes by the name 'Ketty', was born in Medingen on 2nd February 1905. Even when she was a little girl, she was interested in everything related to households. She now has her own place in all of Luxembourg's households. Whether you are a chef, newlyweds or keen on local gastronomy, a cookbook by Ketty Thull is amustfor each and every kitchen and household.
Ketty Thull: an icon for Luxembourgish cuisine
Ketty Thull had apassion for cooking and for everything related to households and home economicsin general.
She completed her studies inHome Economics Teachingin Luxembourg when she was 19, and she left to Louvigny to give lessons there at the Home Economics School. She left her job seven years later to continueher studies at"Le Cordon Bleu"in Paris. She graduated in 1931 from the Paris Academy of Culinary Arts and was employed at the School of Home Economics of Esch-sur-Alzette in 1932.
Ketty Thull has published around17 books: mostly cookbooks, but also books about healthy diets, home economics, food preservation and many more. All these publications werebest-sellersand not only includedrecipes, but also useful tips on cooking techniques, serving and good table manners.
Ketty Thull was very curious, so it's not surprising that she loved to travel. She visited the United States and Canada where she obtained lots of feedback, such as in American supermarkets - anEldoradofor the great lady of Luxembourgish cuisine.
In 1962, she was awardedthe Grand Ducal Order of the Oak Crownfor her merits.
Ketty Thull passed away in 1987, leaving a mark on Luxembourg's cultural and gastronomic heritage.
Cult cookbooks  then as now
Do you have a cookbook by Ketty Thull? And if so, which edition?
Today, old editions, the originals, are the jewels of the kitchen library and beautiful memories of a bygone era. These recipe booklets were a traditional gift to each bride or at graduation for the girls.
In 2011, anew edition of the cult Luxembourgish cookbookwas published.Carlo Sauber, cook and cooking and catering teacher at theLycée technique de Bonnevoie, rewrites part of the recipes in the language of our time, while preserving the uniqueness of the original.
Sothe recipes presented have been chosen from a perspective where modernity and tradition are combinedin order to rediscover classic and local recipes according to the seasons:Bouneschlupp,Feierstengszalot,Kniddelen,Kuddelfleck,Judd mat Gaardebounen,Wäinzoossiss,Kiermescrème,Verwuerelter, etc.
Fränk Weber, a photographer, was in charge of picturingKetty Thull's dishes for the first time. The books she edited herself never got illustrated. The photographs are in line with the book's themes, representingmodernity and tradition. To do this, he had to search the kitchens, cellars and attics of mothers and grandmothers in search of childhood kitchen items.
And to finish on a tasty note, we offer you a culinary delight by Clovis Degrave, chef and owner of the 'Hostellerie du Grünewald'.
If you also fancy making a dish yourself instead of enjoying it in text and image, why not start with this reinterpretation of theFeierstengszalotby Clovis Degrave, for example?
The chef indulges in his passion at theHostellerie du Grünewald(Dommeldange) throughtraditional and contemporary inventive cooking: his menu is short but seasonal and features local produce. Young, cosmopolitan and innovative, Clovis Degrave has been selected together with three other young culinary talents to work alongside chef Kim Kevin de Dood to develop recipes that will be presented for six months at the'Schengen Lounge' as part of the 2021 Dubai Expo.
Feierstengszalot
Slow-cooked crispy beef chuck, mimosa-style egg, candied shallot and herb dressing
Preparation: 1 hour / Cooking: 3 hours
Ingredients
Method
Garnish
Last update23.05.2025
For more information
Cuisine? International.
Verwurrelter: the knotted treat for Carnival season
Flavours
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/maitrank.html
Maitrank
When the first rays of spring sunshine give the world a new splendour and bathe the woods in a delicate green, it is also time to savour a regional speciality: Maitrank. This woodruff-based alcoholic drink is very easy to make yourself and is a real pleasure.
TheMaitrank(literally: May drink) isan alcoholic beverage based on woodruff. It has itsorigins in the region around the Belgian city ofArlon, close to the Luxembourgish border, where festivals are organised to its honour. The Western part of Luxembourg also belongs to this region:Until 1839,Arlonwas part of the (Grand) Duchy of Luxembourg, as was the rest of the Belgian province of Luxembourg. That's why we don't miss the opportunity to present you this simple, yet pleasant recipe.
You just need to embark on the discovery of Luxembourg's woods. If you find woodruff, you will literally have the main ingredient in your pocket.
Ingredients:
Preparation:
Servechilled in a glass with a slice of orange. Alternatively, you can alsoadd some Crémant.
Maitrankcan be kept in the refrigerator for up to 3 weeks.
Last update02.05.2025
Culinary delights
Meekranz and Labour Day: celebrating Spring and workers
Flavours
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/kniddelen-luxembourgish-dumplings.html
Kniddelen
Luxembourgers have mastered the art to make a tasty dish for all seasons out of simple ingredients.Kniddelen, flour dumplings, are such a dish that is quickly whipped up using ingredients found in every kitchen, yet brings a smile to every hungry person at the table. The recipe on this page was originally written down byKetty Thull, perhaps Luxembourg’s most famous cook, whose books are still a popular gift.
A taste of Luxembourg
These dumplings are traditionally associated with the colder seasons, and area treat after a long winter walk, or when you need some comfort food through the dark days. The ingredients – flour, eggs, milk, butter and bacon- mirror the farming past of Luxembourg, when they were the basis of subsistence for large parts of the population. Today, even though the country has hugely diversified, they remain a quote from the past, and for many a fan, they recall fond memories of being at their grandparents’ table. And most recipes will either have been taught from generation to generation, or come from one ofKetty Thull's iconics cookboks.
Ketty Thull, a graduate from the prestigious Paris Academy of Culinary Arts, is a reference for Luxembourgish cuisine. Indeed, most households in the country own at least one copy of her books, newly bought or handed down from generation to generation. Her anthology also used to be the standard gift to newlyweds, and sometimes still is although her first book was published in 1937.
If you would like to prepare this part of Luxembourg’s culinary heritage,here is our recipe,based on the famousKetty Thull.
Ingredients:
Method:
As garnish, you may add chopped parsley or chives, and a side of delicious apple compote. Adry white Moselle winewill do fine as accompaniment.
If there are leftovers, you can heat them in a frying pan at a later date.
Last update23.01.2026
For more information
Gastronomic heritage
Gromperekichelcher
Cuisine? International.
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/draikinnekskuch.html
Galette des rois - Dräikinnekskuch
A real treat for anyone with a sweet tooth, especially frangipane fans! For Epiphany (6th January), the people of Luxembourg love a slice of theirDräikinnekskuch, often known by the French nameGalette des rois(Three Kings Cake). But watch out: a lucky charm is hidden inside the cake! The person who finds it in their slice becomes king or queen for the day and gets to wear a golden cardboard crown.
TheDräikinnekskuchis round and golden, like a little sunthat brightens up homes during the cold, dark days of early January. What sets it apart from other cakes or tarts that you can buy all year round is the gold cardboard crown that sits on top and thelittle surprise hiding inside.This lucky charm used to be a tiny statue of a saint, but now it can be any shape - as long as it is ovenproof!
The cake is quite easy to makeand, if you like frangipane, it is sure to put a smile on your face. The tradition is for thecake to be cut with the whole family gathered round, and everyone gets a piece to seewho will find the charm and be crowned king or queen for the day.
Ingredients:
Method:
Enjoy!
(The recipe was provided by Merlanne. Even though her blog is no longer online, we don't want to deprive you of it).
Last update18.04.2024
Nonnefäscht: sweet treats for carnival
Culinary delights
Festival and traditions
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights/cuisine-international.html
Cuisine? International.
In Luxembourg, the cultural  diversity of the population, the country's  central geographical  position in Europe and  the history of local cuisine all come together  to create  an environment conducive to culinary creation. From simple hearty cooking to haute cuisine, from traditional Luxembourgish dishes to Asian fusion, here you can indulge your taste buds with top-quality local produce, excellent beers and wines that you won't find anywhere else, and the latest creations of innovative chefs.
Traditional Luxembourgish cuisine
Luxembourgish cuisine stands out as a result of its strong relationship with home produce. It is basically simple cuisine marked by regional produce. It consists of potatoes, fruit and vegetables, meat and fish from the country's fields, forests and rivers, which fed the population – especially the rural population – for centuries.
As a result, traditional Luxembourgish cuisine is mainly made up ofrich and tasty dishes. Potatoes are often one of their main ingredients. Sautéed, salted, fried or mashed, they are part of Luxembourgish dishes as a side dish, as a main dish or as a snack.
New interpretations of old-time recipes are gaining in popularity bothin the sphere of home cooking and gastronomic excellence.
Luxembourgish wines and beerare also part of the equation and are experiencing a real revival. Microbreweries deliver a huge variety of beers and Luxembourgish winemakers produce wines and sparkling wines that can compete with the best in the world.
Traditional Luxembourgish cuisine is indisputably still very much alive.
Here is a (non-exhaustive) list ofa few typical dishes, along with their Luxembourgish names, that you probably came across on menus here:
International cuisine
But Luxembourgish cuisine does not only consist of age old recipes.Manyforeign influenceshave left  a trace in the Luxembourgers' cooking pots: the centuries of foreign dominion (15th to 19th  century), followed by  waves of European migration into the country (from the 19th century onwards) have each left their mark on the  country. Far from blocking foreign influences, Luxembourgers adopted them, which is why traces of all European countries can be found in Luxembourgish cuisine.
In particular,Italian cuisine has spiced up Luxembourg's plates. Italian immigrants of the 19th and 20th centuries – the labour force for the country's steelworks – brought with them their regions' typical dishes,
the most famous example of which ispasta asciutta, which was simply renamedPastaschuttain Luxembourg. This dish is based on dry ingredients and was adopted by Luxembourgers who added minced meat, tomato sauce, garlic, etc.
Michelin stars
The diversity of Luxembourgish cuisine is reflected inquality restaurants. Each year, food lovers wait impatiently for the new editions of the greatest culinary reference books to be published: the Michelin Guide and the Gault & Millau.
Through them, you will discoverdozens restaurants who have been awarded stars of toques to flatter your taste buds, not to mention the many 'Bibs Gourmands' (a feature meaning restaurants with exceptionally good food at a moderate price) of the Michelin Guide. They will take you on a journey of discovery to a land where culinary art goes hand in hand with the art of good living.
There's just one thing left for us to say -Gudden Appetit
Last update26.06.2023
International openness
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Dräikinneksdag: celebrating Epiphany with a cake
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/luxembourg-apiculture-brandenbourg-jungels.html
Apiculture Jungels (Jungels bee-keeping), the empire of bees
In the lush green north of Luxembourg, the buzzing of bees drifts across the rolling landscapes of the Our Nature Park. More often than not, it’s Victor Jungels’ bees that you can hear at work, flitting from flower to flower to produce honey bursting with a variety of flavours. The Jungels name has been associated with artisanal bee-keeping for over three decades now. Here, the honey contains neither preservatives nor any other added ingredients. We spent a day with Victor Jungels to discover a craft that goes far beyond simple honey production.
Did you know that male bees don’t have stingers and therefore can’t sting? And that a queen can lay up to 2,000 eggs a day to ensure the survival of the colony? Or that the worker bees kill the drones (male bees) at the end of the reproductive season? These anecdotes highlight the remarkable organisation of the world of bees. These facts hold no secrets for bee-keeper Victor Jungels, who has dedicated his life to raising these fascinating insects and producing exceptional honey.
A claim that is anything but exaggerated:at Apiculture Jungels, the honey goes straight from hive to jar, with no detours. "Vun der Wab an d'Glas", as he proudly affirms in Luxembourgish. No artificial ingredients, no preservatives. Just pure honey, harvested and jarred with the utmost care.
Pure and natural honey
Before the golden nectar is jarred and preferably spread on toast, a great deal of work takes place behind the scenes. At daybreak, the bee-keeper leaps into action and heads straight to his hives. His daily rhythm adapts to that of the bees. "In the morning, when the temperature is still cool and the hives are calm, we seize the opportunity to intervene. But as soon as the sun warms up and the bees become active, we leave them alone. In the middle of the day, it’s best not to disturb them – they’re busy working and they’ll let you know it", explains Victor Jungels.
His colonies are mainly located around the forestsin theOur Nature Park, since the diversity of the landscapes there offers excellent conditions for producing authentic-flavoured honey. During the summer,over 15 million beeswork for the bee-keeping enterprise.
Once the liquid gold has been extracted from the hives, Victor returns to his workshop where the humming of machines replaces the buzzing of bees. "Our honey extraction process is fully automated using professional equipment, unlike the methods used by amateur bee-keepers", he explains to us. The sweet smell of freshly harvested honey fills the air, teasing the senses – an irresistible temptation that makes you want to dip your finger into the vat and taste this warm golden nectar.
Once the honey has been extracted, it is poured into huge vats to rest for a few days. Next comes the packaging stage, when it is put into jars. In a good year, Victor canharvest between 4 and 5 tonnes of honey, and his range is very diverse, including spring honey, dandelion honey, summer honey, forest honey, linden honey and propolis honey, not forgetting the stronger-flavoured "Wëllkär-Hunneg". All of these honey varieties are sold directly to consumers.
But the product range goes far beyond this golden nectar. Victor also sellspollen, honey liqueur, hydromel– also known as honey wine – and various by-products such as furniture wax, candles and even propolis.
A completely autonomous bee-keeper
All of these products highlight the artisanal expertise of Apiculture Jungels. In a field where professional bee-keepers are few and far between, Victor Jungels has established himself as a key reference. Withover 35 years of experience, his bee farm is the oldest one in the country.  It all began in the 1980s when Victor’s parents transitioned to bee-keeping. Before that, they had a traditional farm. Ten years ago, their son followed in their footsteps. Today, Victor runs the company with his parents, together with the precious support of seasonal workers or students.
The farm is divided into two parts: one devoted tothe production of honey, with 210 colonies spread across 20 locations from Brandenbourg towards the north; and another which focuses onbreeding queens, with 200 to 300 colonies in summer, intended solely for reproduction purposes.
Apiculture Jungels is virtually the only bee farm that makes a living exclusively from beehive products. "This makes marketing a top priority: it provides us with more security, frees us from reliance on supermarkets and allows us to have full control over our production. We therefore focus entirely on direct-to-consumer sales", emphasises Victor.
But that’s not the company’s only asset.Everything is done in-house, with the family managing the entire supply chain, from the hive to the consumer: honey production, colony care, packaging, labelling and regular attendance at local markets. The Jungels family firmly believes that handling everything themselves is a guarantee of quality, transparency and trust. "By controlling the entire process, we offer premium quality", adds Victor.
What matters most for the Jungels, is keeping their bees in good health. "For this, the bees need to have the right genetic traits", specifies Victor. "By breeding our own queens, we’ve managed to make our bees vigorous, healthy and resistant to varroa mites. As part of our breeding process, we have succeeded in selecting colonies that are able to defend themselves against this parasite. We are actually one of the first bee-keeping farms in Europe that doesn’t require treatments against these mites. This improves the overall well-being of our bees. It’s a real breakthrough."
During winter, the preparation work continues
At the Jungels’ bee farm,no two days are alike, not even in winter. The season is quieter, but the activity doesn’t stop: "We take this opportunity to check our equipment, maintain our machines and attend a few markets. We check the colonies and feed them, then the season ends in October. That’s when the honey processing work begins", explains Victor.
That continues until March, when the new season begins. At this stage, the bees become active again, the first flowers appear and the colonies start to grow. "We check all the hives to make sure they have survived the winter".
Victor harvests the first honey of the season as of April. This ‘spring honey’ has to be extracted quickly because it crystallises faster.  Next comes the following harvest, then the summer honey harvest – the Jungels’ primary production. This honey remains liquid for longer and is harvested towards the end of August.
From that point onwards, winter approaches and the season draws to an end… before beginning again a few months later, with the same dedication and passion.
Last update23.03.2026
For more information
Natura 2000: la contribution du Luxembourg à la protection de la nature au niveau européen
Top 5: les rivages les plus pittoresques
Top 5: villages spéciaux qui méritent une petite excursion
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/natura-2000.html
Natura 2000: Luxembourg’s contribution to European nature conservation
Read the article
Luxembourg boasts an impressive variety of unique landscapes and natural areas. To protect these and preserve them for future generations, the Grand Duchy is implementing conservation programmes, such as the Natura 2000 European protection network. With over 29% of its territory under protection, Luxembourg plays a pioneering role in preserving biodiversity while also promoting social participation in the sustainable use of its land.
Natura 2000 in Luxemburg
People and nature are in harmony in the Grand Duchy. With29% of its land under protection, Luxembourg demonstrates its strong commitment to nature conservation and is moving closer to the European goal set by the EU Biodiversity Strategy, which aims to place one third of Europe’s land area under protection. In Luxembourg,67 Natura 2000 sitescover atotal of approximately 72,000 hectares– making up the majority of the country’s protected areas.49 of these sites are classified as special conservation areas (Zones spéciales de conservation) and 18 as special protection areas (Zones de protection spéciale)for birds, with some overlapping areas. In addition to the Natura 2000 sites, a further 77 areas have been designated as national nature reserves. These make up around 6% of the country’s land area and are controlled by Grand Ducal regulations. A number ofspecial biotopesare also protected at the national level.
The Natura 2000 programmes not only focus on isolated protection, but also on the preservation of entire ecosystems – both within Luxembourg and beyond its borders. The ecological connectivity between the individual areas, to allow for the natural migration of species, is particularly important. In addition,transnational collaborations– such as the German-Luxembourgish dragonfly monitoring project in theOur Valleyor the Belgian-LuxembourgishLIFE ArdennEislekproject – create a dense transnational network of conservation stakeholders who are committed to the same goal.
Anindividual management planis created for each Natura 2000 site. These plans includemeasures for conservation and ecological restoration, as well as various other nature conservation projects in whichcitizen participationand public awareness play a central role. To implement the management plans and projects,steering committees (Comités de pilotage – COPIL)have been established in Luxembourg. Each is responsible for several sites within specific regions. They coordinate local implementation and involve a wide range of stakeholders, taking ecological, economic, social and cultural aspects into account.
COPIL
COPIL Uewersauer
© Caroline Martin, Caro-Line Photography
COPIL Mëllerdall
© NGPM - Photostudio C. Bosseler
COPIL Minetter Dagebaugebidder
© Jan Herr
COPIL Mamer-Äischdall-Gréngewald
© Jean-Claude Schaeffer
COPIL Lias moyen - Alzette supérieure
© Jan Herr
COPIL Éislek
© Raymond Clement
COPIL Guttland Musel
© Marc Thiel
COPIL Atert-Warkdall
© Dan Petry
Natura 2000 Day
European Natura 2000 Dayis celebrated on 21 May of each year to raise awareness of the protected area network and its dedication to environmental and wildlife conservation. In this context, the 2025 edition of theNatura 2000 Day in Luxembourg was held together with the "Klima- a Biodiversitéitsdag"(climate and biodiversity day) on18 May in Grevenmacher. All information about this year's edition will be available on the websitewww.natura2000.lu.
Protected species and habitats
The Natura 2000 sites in Luxembourg cover109 of the approximately 1,200 species and habitats classified as worthy of protection at EU level.Some sites also offer ideal conditions for numerous migratory bird species that rest or hibernate there. The top 5 most species-rich sites in the Grand Duchy are:
These sites are predominantly composed offorests, freshwater habitats, grasslands, and rocky environments.There are alsomoors, marshes, heathland and shrubbery.A wide variety of bird species inhabit these areas, including different woodpeckers, owls, the grey heron, the kingfisher and the sedge warbler. Other animals and insects, such as the Bechstein’s bat, the southern damselfly, the marsh fritillary, and even sensitive mollusc species such as the river mussel, have also been recorded in these sites.
To ensure their continued existence,adapted management practicesare used, which protect the flora and fauna and contribute to their preservation. Particularly interesting areas include those that were created through previous human activities – such as agriculture or resource extraction – and have developed intovaluable biotopesfollowing their renaturation. An impressive example of this is the"Minetter Dagebaugebidder", where Luxembourg’s industrial past meets newly created natural spaces for both humans and wildlife. The former open-pit mining sites now provide a secure habitat for numerous rare plant and animal species, and the abandoned iron ore tunnels have become underground refuges for many bat species. The area also offers diverse opportunities for tourism and recreational activities – always in harmony with local conservation measures. Such connections between near-natural and cultivated habitats make the Grand Duchy an important part of the European nature conservation network.
The European protected area network
Natura 2000 is thecentrepiece of European nature and biodiversity policyand is considered thelargest coordinated network of protected areas in the world.In all 27 European Union Member States, designated areas protect particularly valuable and endangered species and habitats – both on land and at sea. The networks are managed at national level and are based on the provisions of theEU Birds Directiveand theEU Habitats Directive, which aim to conserve biodiversity within Europe.
The nearly28,000 Natura 2000 sites cover approximately 18% of the EU’s land area and 9% of its marine areas. They protect over1,000 species of animals and plants, as well as around 230 habitat types. Unlike traditional nature reserves, the protection in Natura 2000 sites is not primarily tied to the geographical area but to the preservation of specific species or habitats. The focus is not on imposing specific prohibitions or excluding human activities, but rather on integratingsectors such as agriculture, tourism and industry into the conservation strategies in a suitable way. The programme’s focus is oninclusive, enlightened and sustainable usethat positively influences the conservation and preservation of habitats and species. Biodiversity and human activity are not seen as opposites here, but rather go hand in hand.
Natura 2000 Explainer Video (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update24.02.2026
For more information
Forests in Luxembourg
Top 5: Most picturesque rivers
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/rivages-rivieres-pittoresques-romantiques.html
Top 5: Most picturesque rivers
Sail along Luxembourg's rivers and admire some of the country's most stunning landscapes. Explore the Moselle valley, marvel at the spectacular rock formations in Little Switzerland and relax in the rural tranquillity of northern Luxembourg. Several waterways inspire romance, others have stories to tell or boast cultural treasures. But above all, their appeal lies simply in the wonderful variety of picturesque scenery they offer up to visitors.
The Moselle
The Moselle begins in the Vosges mountains in France and wends its way through Luxembourg for 39km before joining the Rhine in Germany. For the entire length of its journey through Luxembourg, fromSchengentoWasserbillig, the Moselle flows through a series of picturesque villages, includingBech-Kleinmacher, Ehnen, MachtumandWormeldange, all of which are well worth exploring.Winery tours, tastings of local products, a bike ride along the river(with RentaBike miselerland)or a leisurely stroll through vineyards are all great ways to pass the time. And while you are in the area, we would recommend going to theSchengen Museumto find out more about the Schengen agreements and free movement in Europe.
Each twist or turn in the river reveals new ways ofexploring this unique region– and there is something for everyone, from wine enthusiasts to nature lovers or those just looking to relax and unwind.
Several historical bridges cross the Moselle on the Route du Vin in Luxembourg, each with its own history and character. The bridge inRemichis a great example, symbolising European unity and cross-border cooperation.
Throughout its course, the Moselle is characterised by hilly landscapes, gently sloping vineyards and winegrowers' villages full of charming houses with brightly coloured flowers spilling out from the windows. Complete the Route du Vin in style with acruise on the Moselleand a chance to sip fine Luxembourg wines as the sun slowly sets over the vineyards.
Highlights
The Black Ernz
The Black Ernz is formed by the confluence of two streams, the Kriipsebaach and the Iernsterbaach, in the Grünewald forest. The river then continues its course alone, wending its way through fields and lush meadows, green valleys and hills, before entering one of the country's most beautiful regions, theMullerthal.
In this area known for its spectacular rock formations, dense forests and hiking trails, the Black Ernz flows merrily from meander to meander, providing a generous habitat for frogs, dragonflies and other river dwellers and flowing peacefully through enchanting scenery until it arrives at theSchiessentümpel.
Here it gathers pace, its gentle melody becoming a gurgling dance before it unleashes its full force in a sparkling waterfall. Many couples – and also families, friends and nature lovers – flock to this stunning natural spectacle to daydream and admire the power of nature.
After this frantic interruption, the river becomes calm again. Its waters slow down and glide gently between the stones, looking for new adventures with each bend and loop in their course.
Highlights
The Sûre (Sauer)
Flowing for 135km through Luxembourg, the Sûre (or Sauer) is the country's longest river. It emerges in Belgium, crosses into Luxembourg at Rombach and continues its course to Wasserbillig, where it joins the Moselle.
The Sûre passes through historical towns like Diekirch and Echternach, as well as more peaceful areas far removed from urban hustle and bustle, includingGoebelsmühle,Bavigne,InsenbornandRommwiss. In these charming hamlets known for their tranquil surroundings, local produce is never far away. Push open the door of an inn and you will be met with a veritable cornucopia of local specialities and fresh ingredients. Hearty classics immediately spring to mind, such asGromperekichelecher,Kuddelfleck, Huesenziwwi, Bouneschlupp and Paschtéit.
But the Sûre is not just a treat for the tastebuds; it is also a feast for the eyes. Its meandering course takes it through lush green landscapes, thick forests, vast fields and flowering meadows – picture-postcard views that offer plenty of opportunities to daydream and unwind.
Naturpark ÖewersauerandNaturpark Ourare perfect examples. Here, everywhere you turn there are walking trails, open-air activities and the chance to breathe in the fresh air, enjoy the natural surroundings and relax.
The highlight of any trip to this region is Esch-sur-Sûre, one of the most picturesque villages in Luxembourg, with its majestic castle perched on a hilltop, surrounded by the meanders of the Sûre. From the castle, a breathtaking view of the valley unfolds beneath your eyes, creating an unforgettable experience.
Highlights
The Attert
"Un der Atert, no beim Waasser, wou di grousseg Pëpple stin, wunnt de Bauer Péitche Lauer a säi Meedchen d'Josefin..." is the beginning of a popular Luxembourgish songthat tells the story of a young woman who finds love on the banks of the river Attert. One day she falls in the water and her sweetheart tries to save her. But the song does not say whether the woman drowns or survives, leaving her fate unknown.
Against the backdrop of this tragic love story,the song depicts the beauty of nature on the banks of the river Attert, where mighty poplars rise majestically. The song combines love, nature and melancholy in a peaceful setting that is perfect for nature lovers and also for anyone wanting to share a private moment, lulled by the soothing murmur of the water. The Attert flows through forests and meadows, creating a wonderfully gentle, poetic landscape.
But the banks of the river, which wends its way through villages includingOberpallen, Ell, Redange, Useldange and Bissen, are not just an idyllic natural setting: they are also strewn with historical treasures such as themediaeval Useldange Castle, Colpach Castleand theBaroque church in Redange-sur-Attert, built in 1771. The village of Redange-sur-Attert is also home to a19th-century wash house, a listed historical monument. This relic of the past is as precious as the unforgettable moments spent sitting on the riverbank watching the world go by.
Highlights
The Alzette
The source of the Alzette is in the French region of Lorraine, but most of its course is in Luxembourg. It wends its way peacefully from the south to the north of the country over roughly 70km, forming loops and meanders. It crosses through valleys, green fields and pretty villages. The poetMichel Lentz (1820-1893)highlighted the river's romantic nature in the first lines of Luxembourg's national anthem: "Wou d'Uelzecht duerch d'Wisen zéit" ("Where the Alzette slowly flows").
As the Alzette flows away from the plain, leaving behind fields and meadows, its course takes it towards Luxembourg City. At the foot of theBock promontory, by the entrance to the Grund, it discreetly joins with the Pétrusse. In this historical setting, it creates a wonderfully romantic setting: surrounded by ancient ramparts, old stone houses and picturesque bridges, with ducks cheerfully quacking in the background, it offers visitors a stunning tableau worthy of a painting.
The view from the bridge over the Grund (Rue Münster) is a great example: it is simply breathtaking, with half-timbered houses, steep cliffs, the Bock promontory and the steeple of St John's Church towering over the scene. And the scenery becomes even more delightful as we make our way along the banks, under the historical walls ofNeimënster Abbey, and arrive at Stierchen Bridge. The vista over this relic of theWenzel wall, framed by trees rising from the water, is a dreamy setting, perfect for a romantic stroll or a moment of reflection.
Highlights
Last update23.03.2026
For more information
Top 5: villages spéciaux qui méritent une petite excursion
Les forêts au Luxembourg
Top 5: les communes luxembourgeoises jumelées
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/forests-luxembourg-trees.html
Forests in Luxembourg
"A small man stands in the forest, silent and still." This nursery rhyme, like so many other stories and legends, is set in the forest. Schetzel, a hermit who lived in Luxembourg in the 12th century, chose to live alone in nature, spending his final years in theGrünewald, where his cave can still be visited to this day. The forests of the Grand Duchy and other regions are home to a wide range of animal and plant species. They are one of the pillars of food security and nutrition for millions of families around the world. In this article, we will take a closer look at the woodlands of Luxembourg and talk to Michel Dostert, an expert in forest management.
Covering an area of about 130,000 football pitches
The Grand Duchy is covered by 92,150 hectares of forest, equivalent to around 35% of Luxembourg's surface area.  Hardwoods cover 64% of this area and softwoods 36%.
In terms of ownership, 52% of the plots of land are privately owned by around 14,000 family companies or private individuals:  34% are municipal forests, 13% are state-owned forests and 1% of forests belong to public institutions.
Moreover, 55% of the forested area is located in theEislek. This region in the north of the country therefore contains a larger proportion of woodland than the rest of the country. Another interesting fact - more than 85% of forests are located less than 1,500 metres from a built-up area, which makes them ideal spots for leisure activities.
Forests - guardians of treasures
The forests are home to a wide variety of trees and plants, including beech, oak, maple and ash. Beech is the most common tree species in Luxembourg and the undergrowth is often rich in herbaceous plants and shrubs.
These habitats play host to various animal species, including mammals such as deer, boar and foxes. There is also a wide variety of birds, insects and other small animals.
Luxembourg's forests contain asignificant amount of dead wood and old trees, which is ideal for biodiversity. These elements provide key habitats for many species, including fungi, lichens and insects.
Eist wëllt Lëtzebuerg 2024 (1/4) (Video/Audio YouTube)
Exploring a protected forest
Eist wëllt Lëtzebuerg
Discover "Wild Luxembourg" - a series on special natural habitats and the role they play for their inhabitants and understand how these geographical areas are connected to our everyday lives. The series is produced by the Ministry of the Environment, Climate and Biodiversity.
Public forests
Public forests are managed bythe Nature and Forestry Administrationvia various tools.
A forest inventoryis a descriptive analysis of a forest's ecosystem, including maps and data, which is essential for forest management and planning.
Forests mappingidentifies the best conditions for tree growth according to the type of soil, topography and climate, and recommends suitable tree species. It is crucial to nature-friendly forestry, which uses plantings to enhance biodiversity and protect natural habitats. Respecting the suitability of species is required by law and involves an in-depth understanding of the needs of the species and the characteristics of the site.
Forest managementis a long-term, ten-year management plan for a forest estate, aimed at harvesting timber sustainably while taking the landowner's expectations on board and fostering ecological, social and economic benefits. Modern planning takes community interests as well as recreation and nature conservation needs into account.
The annual management planis drafted by the district manager and the forestry officer, who set out and budget for the measures to be taken to ensure the sustainable management of the forest, protect nature and raise public awareness. It is also approved by the landowner.
Did you know?
Any interested person or group can play an active role in forestry management planning and monitoring by sharing their ideas and proposals. Every year, a list of the forest properties undergoing restoration is published and contributions can be sent byemailto the Forestry Department within 4 weeks of the project launch date.
Please note, these management instruments apply exclusively to public forests.  The management plan is accepted and implemented by the landowners, in this case the municipalities.  Landowners of private forests draw up a management plan themselves or with the help of a consultancy firm.
Lëtzebuerger Privatbësch
Lëtzebuerger Privatbëschis a non-profit organisation. Its aim is to support the landowners of private forests in Luxembourg. Since 2010, the association has been organising, among other matters, the forestry licence, which offers ten different courses on forests. These courses include lectures and excursions, and can be taken independently of each other. In addition to the forestry licence, chainsaw training is also provided, offering essential practical training for forest management.
To find out more about the different services and projects, we spoke toMichel Dostert, Forestry Engineer (MSc.) and Wildlife Management (MSc.)with the group.
How do landowners of private forests actively preserve forests in Luxembourg?
Almost all landowners of private forests have been affected by climate change, which has become a major issue over the last decade. Certain trees died as a direct result of drought, while others were weakened before being attacked by pathogens such as insects or fungi. Private landowners are making a huge effort to replant affected woodland areas with species adapted to climate change. We need to plant 2,500 saplings per hectare, which represents thousands of trees.
Can you give us an example of a recent or current project that demonstrates your association's commitment to forest management?
We have hundreds of different types of small sites all over the country, because our work takes place on land owned by private individuals in the Grand Duchy. Together, they own more than half of Luxembourg's woodland. In 2024, we carried out 309 on-site consultations, organised the planting of more than 80,000 trees and the cutting of 27,000 m3 of wood. Our organisation is also committed to long-term sustainability: in 2023, we celebrated our 90th anniversary.
What tools and technologies do you use to monitor the health of forests?
At this stage, we don't use any specific technology, particularly on the small private plots we work on. As a non-profit organisation, we don't have the means to finance drones, for example, and they are of limited use anyway. Instead, we essentially rely upon our own eyesight and experience.
Can you tell us about the partnerships your association has set up with municipalities or other organisations and institutions to strengthen your management and conservation efforts?
We work exclusively on private plots of land, but we are in constant contact with theAdministration de la Nature et des Forêts(Nature and Forestry Administration), with whom we have a very good working relationship. We are represented on a number of institutions, including the Natura2000 COPILS, theConseil supérieur de la forêt, theConseil supérieur de la chasseand theConseil supérieur pour la protection de la nature. Through an agreement with the Ministry of the Environment, we are very active in the Natura2000 networks, where we mark biotope trees and areas of old growth.
We would like to thank Michel Dostert for this interview.
Lëtz' reGenerate! (Video/Audio YouTube)
Lëtzebuerger Privatbësch: a commitment to preserving woodlands in Luxembourg and the Greater Region.
Every year,on 21 March, we celebrateInternational Forest Day. Luxembourg's forests need our support. Don't wait, contactLëtz'reGeneratetoday to find out how you can help our forests.
Last update04.03.2026
For more information
Le territoire du Luxembourg
Top 5: villages spéciaux qui méritent une petite excursion
Top 5: les communes luxembourgeoises jumelées
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/jumelage-commune-luxembourgeoises.html
Top 5: Luxembourg twinned municipalities
In Luxembourg, around 50 municipalities have "tied the knot" with more than 130 foreign towns in twinning “ceremonies”. Germany is the leading partner with 20 unions, followed by France, Portugal and Italy.  The twinning of towns took root in the aftermath of the Second World War, with the aim of bringing different people closer together.  Nowadays, municipalities are forging links with communities in distant countries in order to create bonds of friendship, meet interesting people and learn about their way of life, whether on a cultural, sporting, economic or educational level. Here's a selection of curious and exceptional pairings.
Consdorf-Nazaré: connecting the forest to the ocean
Each year between October and March, the world turns its attention to the small town of Nazaré on Portugal's Atlantic coast. This seaside resort of around 15,000 inhabitants, renowned for its giant waves, is a genuine surfers paradise. Since 2011, this natural phenomenon known as theBig Wave Challengehas captured the imagination of the people from the four corners of the globe. Waves surging up to 30 meters high rise before hundreds of curious visitors and thrill-seekers who flock to Nazaré each year to admire this extraordinary spectacle.
Far from the hustle and bustle of Nazaré, approximately 2,000 km away, liesLuxembourg's Little Switzerland. In this region, nature seems less effervescent but no less spectacular. In the heart of this lush environment, surrounded by rock formations and endless forests, lies the village ofConsdorf, a small market town with some 2,000 inhabitants. This quaint village tends to attract walkers and mountain bikers. On the surface, Consdorf and Nazaré have nothing in common, and yet they're actually perfect partners! Since 2017, these two towns have been tied by an“oath of twinning”.In fact, a large number of Portuguese living in Consdorf are originally from the city of waves or its immediate surroundings.
The many twins of Niederanven
For the majority of municipalities, the aim of twinning is to foster closer ties of friendship and to make it easier to get to know each other through socio-cultural exchanges. In Niederanven, they take this matter seriously! The municipality is twinned with 27 European towns, a record for Luxembourg. The origins of this network date back to 1991, when the municipality signed a partnership agreement with twelve towns in twelve European Union countries. This agreement is referred to as the"Douzelage"(douze is the French word for twelve).
The "Niederanven" family has grown in harmony with EU enlargement. Currently, the family circle includes 27 partner towns each representing an EU member country.
The aim of this union is to cultivate the European spirit and to establish, among other initiatives, educational, economic, touristic, sporting and cultural ties between the towns for the mutual benefit of their respective inhabitants.
Did you know?
The town of Bettembourg has produced a cookery book with its twin towns ofFlaibanoin Italy andValpaçosin Portugal.
Thepublication is called "Trio Culinaire" (Culinary Trio). It provides an insight into the history, geography, culture and, above all, the gastronomy of Bettembourg and its twinned partners.
The book has 184 inspirational pages and takes the reader on a culinary journey, presenting18 delicious specialtiesprepared by professional chefs and food enthusiasts from the three countries.
Schengen-Ischgl: beyond the ski slopes
The ski resort ofIschgl in Austriais well-known to almost all Luxembourgers. Did you know that the twinning between Schengen and Ischgl came about over a drink? In 2006, the two mayors of the two municipalities decided to join forces after meeting for a beer in the ski resort. The partnership celebrations took place in Schengen in June, and the agreement was officially signed in Ischgl in December of the same year.
In celebration of this twinning, every December, the municipality of Schengen offers its citizens a trip to Ischgl. An après-ski song has even been made to showcase this alliance:  Niki Ganahl - fans of “Niki's Stadl” will definitely know it - "Espace sans frontières".
Schengen, the birthplace of the synonymous European agreements, is a symbol of the free movement of people and goods. Hence, the village on the Moselle river encourages exchanges between its inhabitants to cultivate a sense of European brotherhood.
Esch-sur-Alzette-João Monlevade: an iron bond
Mettwurscht or Churrasco?  The people of Esch-sur-Alzette and João Monlevade (Brazil) can't tell the difference! In fact, the city of Esch, commonly referred to as the Iron Metropolis, and the town of João Monlevade cemented their friendship by twinning in 2023. It's their common industrial heritage that brings them together. A steel key, forged in João Monlevade's steelworks, was donated to the town of Esch. It is a symbol of this iron bond.
This twinning is historic, as it marks the first union between a Luxembourg town and a Brazilian city. The rapprochement took root a hundred years ago, when an ARBED plant named 'Companhia Siderúrgica Belgo Mineira' was inaugurated in the heart of the state of Minas Gerais. At the beginning of the 20th century, a large number of Esch residents, in particular engineers, emigrated with their families to Brazil tosupport the development of the Brazilian steel industry.
Préizerdaul and its long-distance support
To see the twin towns of the Préizerdaul municipality, its citizens would have to travel a long, long way. The twin town which is the furthest from Luxembourg is located in El Salvador. To get to San Augustin, you'll have to cross the Atlantic and travel around 9,200 kilometers as the crow flies. The second twin is the town of Péni in Burkina Faso. These two long-distance relationships were born in the early 2000s as part of local development projects in Central America and West Africa.
In January 2001, San Agustín was hit by a devastating earthquake. The aid organisation 'Komm hëllef mat Préizerdaul' was set up in 2002 to help people affected by the disaster. In 2004, a twinning agreement was signed with the town of San Augustin in El Salvador. The twinning and its concrete financial support have made it possible to carry out the water pipeline project in the Salvadorian town. Education, healthcare and infrastructure projects have also been set up. In the wake of these aid efforts, a second long-distance partnership was established in 2006, with the municipality of Péni in Burkina Faso, which also benefits from development aid.
Last update11.12.2025
For more information
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/top-5-special-villages.html
Top 5: Special villages worth visiting
In our Top 5 series, we're taking you on a journey across the country to discover some of Luxembourg's most remarkable villages. Join us as we explore both well-known and lesser-known ones – from tiny hidden hamlets to important places in European history. So, grab your map and let's dive in!
The smallest village: Rindschleiden
Our first stop is the little gem ofRindschleiden(Luxembourgish:Randschelt), situated in the western part of the country and said to be thesmallest village in Luxembourg. According to official records, this village in the municipality of Grosbous-Walonly has one registered resident– and even he has his main residence in the neighbouring village! But this sparsely populated spot nestled amidst the picturesque landscape is far from deserted and neglected.The quaint little village comes alive each day with numerous visitors, tourists and school groupswho head here to explore the Thillenvogtei rural museum, take a break at the "Klenge Randschelter Bistrot" or visit the protected monument of St. Willibrord's Church.
Das kleinste Dorf: Rindschleiden
Rindschleiden
The smallest village in Luxembourg appears deserted at first glance, but is visited by numerous tourists every day.
© Elisabeth Ney
St Willibrord Church
The church of St Willibrord is a listed building and dates back to the 10th century.
© Visit Guttland
Musée Thillenvogtei
At the Musée Thillenvogtei, history becomes an interactive experience.
© Visit Guttland
Meditation path
Pure relaxation! Immerse yourself in the nature around Rindschleiden on the 1.5 km meditation trail.
© Pancake! Photographie
Map - Rindschleiden
© SIP
Want to learn how grandma used to bake bread, or how to make Viz (cider) from apples? TheThillenvogteihas made it its mission topreserve Luxembourgish traditionsand customs. The museum has been attracting young and old alike with an interestingliving history programmefor over 30 years.
The"Klenge Randschelter Bistrot Miro"is the perfect place for a culinary stop-off when exploring this charming one-soul village. Formerly a pigsty, this cosy restaurant boasts a unique interior: itswalls are covered with quotes and photosthat take the guests on a journey through decades gone by.
Conclude your visit by immersing yourself in the enchanting local nature on the 1.5-km-longMeditation Path Rindschleiden. Leading past waters, through forests and over meadows, thisserene route lets you round off a relaxing visittoRandscheltwith a mindful and relaxing walk.
The most famous village: Schengen
The next stop on our Top 5 list takes us to what isperhaps Luxembourg's most famous village:Schengen. You've probably heard of theSchengen Agreements, which permit thefree movement of people and goods within the borders of Europe. The landmark agreement, which makes daily travel and commuting considerably easier for most Europeans, was concluded on14 June 1985in this peaceful village on the Mosel river.
Located at thetripoint of Luxembourg, France and Germany, the village became a symbol of European values and a cornerstone of European policy, when theSchengen Agreementswere signed on board the MSPrincesseMarie-Astrid. In 1985, the original treaty was agreed between just five countries. Today,27 nations make up the Schengen Area, which allows over 400 million people to travel freely without border controls.
For visitors wanting to learn more about the birthplace of borderless Europe, theEuropean Museumoffers aninteractive exhibitionand numerous themed tours. To get an authentic sense of the historic moment when the agreement was signed, you can take a leisurelyboat ride along the Moselle riveron the newMSPrincesseMarie-Astrid.
The picturesque setting along the Moselle river makes Schengen anideal starting point for a stroll on theCircular walk Schengen, which leads along the esplanade and through the characteristic vineyards overlooking the beautiful Moselle Valley. Wine lovers can enjoy an excellent glass of Riesling orCrémantin one of the numerouswineries in this winemaking village.
Das bekannteste Dorf: Schengen
Schengen
The idyllic village of Schengen on the Moselle is probably the most famous village in Luxembourg.
© Visit Moselle
A walk through the vineyards
The vineyards in the Schengen area are perfect for a stroll.
© Visit Moselle
Place des Étoiles
On the square in front of the European Museum, the star-spangled columns of nations have been erected. There are other symbolic monuments in the neighbourhood, such as the monument to the Schengen Agreements and pieces of the Berlin Wall.
© LFT - Renata Lusso
The Schengen Agreements Monument
The "Schengen Agreement" memorial commemorates the historic moment on 14 June 1985.
© SIP / Emmanuel Claude
Map - Schengen
© SIP
The village with the longest name: Schlindermanderscheid
The name of the next village is a real tongue twister:Schlindermanderscheid(Luxembourgish:Schlënnermanescht). Just try to pronounce it! With 21 letters, the village in the northern municipality of Bourscheid bears thelongest place name in Luxembourg. The name comes from its proximity to the Schlinder river (Luxembourgish:Schlënner), which winds its way through a small rocky gorge in this region.
Das Dorf mit dem längsten Namen: Schlindermanderscheid
Schlindermanderscheid
View over the small village of Schlindermanderscheid and the hilly Ardennes landscape
© Archives communales de Bourscheid
Auto-Pédestre Schlindermanderscheid
Hikers can explore the beautiful Schlinder Valley on the picturesque 7.5 km long circular walk Auto-Pédestre Schlindermanderscheid.
© Visit Éislek
Malpaartes
At the " Castle Malpaartes", a plaque refers to the famous Luxembourgish fable "Renert oder de Fuuss am Frack an a Maansgréisst".
© Visit Éislek
Map - Schlindermanderscheid
© SIP
But this small village with 144 inhabitants is not just known for its long and complex name – it is also the home of theRenert, from the fable"Renert oder de Fuuss am Frack an a Maansgréisst"(Renert or the fox in a tailcoat and in human shape) by the Luxembourgish writer Michel Rodange. In the tale, considered one of the most important works in the Luxembourgish language, the clever fox lives in"Malpaartes Castle". Although this castle never existed, a wooded slope bearing the same name can be found inSchlënnermanescht.
Visitors who want to immerse themselves in the story in person can explore theSchlënner Valley and Malpaartes on the picturesqueAuto-Pédestre Schlindermanderscheidcircular walk.
The most cosmopolitan village: Strassen
Luxembourg City is known for beingmultilingual, multicultural and open-minded. As the next village on our Top 5 list shows, the same also holds true for Luxembourg's villages. Situated near the capital,Strassen(Luxembourgish: Stroossen)boasts 111 different nationalities, making it perhaps the most cosmopolitan villagein the whole country. An impressive60.26% of the population, that is 6,380 residents, have anon-Luxembourgish nationality, and 33% of the remaining 4,208 Luxembourgish citizens have dual citizenship. And the village's younger population is equally cosmopolitan: 83.8% of primary school children cite a language other than Luxembourgish as their main language.
Stroossenmay be a village in the Grand Duchy. But thanks to its close proximity to Luxembourg City, itsarray of restaurants, shops and leisure activities, and last but not least, its international population, it boasts all the benefits of a suburb.
Despite its urban location, the village borders on the municipal forest "Stroosserbësch", which, together with Luxembourg City's "Bambësch" and the municipality of Mamer's "Juckelsbësch", formsone of the largest forests in the Grand Duchy. A variety of walking and hiking routes, such as theAuto-Pédestre Strassencircular walk, offer a haven oftranquillity and relaxation just a stone's throw from the city.
If you're keen to explore Strassen's cultural side, be sure to check out the internationally renownedBiennale d'Art Contemporain, which showcases bothestablished artists and emerging young talentsin the fields of painting, sculpture, photography and installation every two years. The next edition will take place on from 5 to 17 June 2026.
Das Dorf mit dem längsten Namen: Schlindermanderscheid
Strassen
Next to the Centre Culturel Paul Barblé, Strassen offers a charming village centre that invites you to linger.
© Commune de Strassen
Biennale d'Art Contemporain
Since 2001, visitors can discover new talents and artworks at the Biennale for contemporary art.
© Commune de Strassen
Map - Strassen
© SIP
The most colourful village: Kahler
A real gem awaits you on our final stop!Kahler(Luxembourgish:Koler) isperhaps the most colourful village in Luxembourg. Between 2017 and 2018, it was given a makeover as part of an art project featuring the tagline"Make Koler Kooler". For his bachelor's thesis,illustrator and street artistAlain Weltertransformed his small and sleepy home village in southwestern Luxembourg into a uniqueopen-airgallery. Since then, this hamlet with 344 inhabitants has stood out in the Luxembourgish countrysidewith its façades adorned with vibrant artworks and creative illustrations.
Das Dorf mit dem längsten Namen: Schlindermanderscheid
Kahler
The village impresses with its colourful works of art on numerous house facades.
© DGT - Sophie Margue
Open-air gallery
The colourful facades cannot be overlooked and can easily be explored on foot.
© DGT - Sophie Margue
Colourful urban art creations
There are no limits to your imagination! A new creation awaits you around every corner..
© Alain Welter
Map - Kahler
© SIP
You'll encounter anything you can imagine: whether it's a funky monkey orchestra, a motorised biker snail or a vibrant barn mosaic – a new, fantastic piece of urban art is waiting to be discovered around every corner. The artworks can beleisurely explored on footas part of theCircular walk Garnich, for example,or by bicycle. And if you happen to get lost, you can always rely on the large map ofKoler– conveniently placed on a barn door – to guide you back on track!
Why not combine a visit to Kahler with atrip to the cinema? TheKinoler, which opened in the centre of the village in 2018, isLuxembourg's smallest cinema. But despite its tiny size, this movie theatre with 46 seats offers visitors atop-notch cinema experience. With state-of-the-art technology, comfortable seats and the latest blockbusters, it has everything you need for a cosy night at the movies!
Last update24.02.2026
For more information
Regions
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Top 5: extraordinary activities in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat/territoire.html
Luxembourg's territory
Located between Germany, Belgium and France, Luxembourg is one of the smallest countries in the world, covering a 2,586 km2 area. The country's territory is divided into two geographical regions: the Oesling up north and theGuttlandin the centre and south. In the east, Luxembourg is bordered by the Moselle and Our rivers that form 135 km of natural border between the Grand Duchy and Germany. The Southern border with France is 73 km long and the Western border with Belgium 148 km.
Fact sheet of the territory
Geographical coordinates: 49° 37' of Northern latitude and 6° 08' of Eastern longitudeArea: 2,586 km2. North-South: 82 km, East-West: 57 km.Borders: 356 km, including 148 km with Belgium, 135 km with Germany and 73 km with France.Altitudes: maximum (Wilwerdange): 560 m; minimum (Wasserbillig): 130 m.Main rivers:Moselle(37 km), Sûre (136 km),Alzette(67 km).
Surfaces:
Area covered by water: 0.6% of the national territory.Farmland and forest areas: 85.2%.Built areas: 9.7%.Roads, railroads, etc.: 4.5%
Geographic areas
Luxembourg Ardennes
TheÉislek(or Oesling), in the northern part of the country forms part of the Ardennes massif and borders the GermanEifelregion. It is a very green area covering 828 km2, i.e. one third of the territory. It features breathtaking landscapes where high plateaus alternate with steep slopes and wooded valleys with murmuring rivers.
In the heart of the Ardennes, thenature reserves of the Ourandthe Haute-Sûre, with its reservoir, which is also the largest lake in the Grand Duchy, attract nature lovers and offer many opportunities for leisure and recreation.
The highest point in the Grand Duchy (560 m) is here, in Wilwerdange. The main towns in this region are Wiltz, Clervaux and Vianden.
Guttland
Guttland, literally the 'good country', lies in the south and centre of the country. Together with the capital, it occupies the remainder of the country (68%, or 1,758 km2). This region is essentially made up ofcountryside, forests and, in the south, mining regions. Over two-thirds of this area are farmland. Several tourist regions are located in theGuttland:
TheCity of Luxembourg, millennial and European capital. This region and its surroundings are characterised by vast woodlands, landscaped areas, the Petrusse and Alzette valleys as well as a city harmoniously blending contemporary architecture with historical buildings and the remains of the fortress.
TheMoselle valley, known as theMuselby Luxembourgish people is the Grand Duchy's most impressive valley, both in terms of size and variety of landscapes. It is one of the country's main tourist attractions, largely on account of its winemaking activities and its breathtaking sceneries.
TheMullerthal region- Luxembourg's Little Switzerland (Mëllerdall) lies in the north of the Moselle valley, bordering Germany. This region's particular appellation is owed to the many rocky hills amidst which watercourses winding their way.
TheLand of the Red Rockslies South of the country. The area has been moulded by industry where iron ore was extracted from the red earth, hence the nameMinett(from 'minette', the designation for iron ore in the Lorraine) applied to this region in Lëtzebuergesch. Today, former industrial wastelands have been urbanised or converted into nature reserves.
Administrative organisation of the territory
From an administrative point of view, the territory is divided into:
Luxembourg City is thecapital of the Grand Duchy and seat of the government.
By law, the following municipalities may actually bear the title of 'city': Diekirch, Differdange, Dudelange, Echternach, Esch-sur-Alzette, Ettelbruck, Grevenmacher, Luxembourg, Remich, Rumelange, Vianden and Wiltz.
The territory's development
Today, the Grand Duchy is one of of the smallest European states. But it was not always the case: with the acquisition of the County of Chinyin 1364, the former Duchy of Luxembourg reached its largest area in its history: 10,000 square kilometres. Over the following centuries, Luxembourg came under foreign domination and was divided three times:
Last update05.12.2024
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/architecture-pavillon-osaka.html
Architecture of the Luxembourg Pavilion in Osaka: Circular and responsible
The design plan behind the Luxembourg Pavilion’s impressive structure reaches far beyond the Osaka 2025 Expo. The Grand Duchy is showcasing an architectural vision that is both circular and sustainable. Every element has been carefully selected and designed to be reused or recycled with a new life already in mind. Find out more about how this project expands the boundaries of responsible construction.
Circularity at the heart of design
The Luxembourg Pavilion at the Osaka 2025 Expo was designedby the Luxembourg architectural firm STDMaccording to theprinciples of circularity.
It is atemporary structure intended for 12 months' use. The first six months after the construction were used to put togetherthe scenographyand to commission the pavilion for opening. The following six months cover the operation period throughout the Expo from 13 April to 13 October 2025.
In this context, to ensure maximum adherence to the philosophy of circularity, two questions were addressed. Firstly,how can a short-term use structure justify the consumption of the resources and energyrequired for its construction? Which led to the second question:How do you substantially reduce the consumptionof materials?
These considerations prompted the team of architects from STDM tothink about the future of the pavilionand what would happen to the materials after the end of the exhibitionfrom the very start of the planning phase. As a result, three strategies linked to circularity took on greater significance:
This is how the concept "design for disassembly" came to the fore. This approach puts the focus on designing buildings and products in a way that facilitates their disassemblyat the end of their first cycle of use.
What is circularity?
Circular economyis all aboutusing resources in the most efficient, non-destructive way for as long as possible. By optimising the design and usage, waste will be minimised or even eliminated.
The model of the circular economy is a key theme for eco-innovation and a hot topic for Luxembourg's economic sector. Circular economy is the future. The idea of endlessly recycling or even upgrading resources  could solve essential problems of our time, i.e. environmental protection or scarcity of resources. Luxembourg understood the opportunities this offered early on and has been strengthening its circular and performance economy for years now.
From positive frugality to the re-use of the "Major Four"
The"rethink" strategyresulted in the design of anabove-ground constructionthat was aslightweightas possible. In processed products, there is in fact a direct link between their weight and the energy consumed during their production and installation; it was therefore important to make the construction lightweight, by using only the components that were strictly necessary. This positive frugality maximises the resources used.
From their side, within thestrategy for "re-use", the architects considered the "Major Four", namely:
Arnaud De Meyer, architect of the Luxembourg Pavilion
The architect Arnaud De Meyer was born in 1972 in Brussels. Since 1989 he has been working with Luxembourg architect Nico Steinmetz. STDM is currently one of Luxembourg's leading architectural firms, known both for its iconic creations,regularly recognised with theOAIBauhärepräis(Project Owner's Award) and theLUCA Luxembourg Architecture Award, and its participation in debates on the role of architecture in Luxembourg's urban development.
Arnaud De Meyer is passionate about urban sketching and is afounder member of Urban Sketchers Luxembourg, a movement that aims to promote the artistic, narrative and educational value of on-location drawing. Combining this passion with his involvement in the pavilion's design, he also contributed to the creation of acollector's stamp issued by Philately POSTas part of the 2025 World Expo.
"Luxembourg inspires me," says Arnaud De Meyer, who sees architecture as much more than a mere design task: it is a responsibility – towards the environment, towards the people who live in the spaces created, and towards future generations. It is this mindset that guided the design of the pavilion for the Osaka World Expo: using materials that can be reused after the event, minimising waste and reminding us all that we only have one planet.
Faces of Luxembourg #17 – Arnaud De Meyer (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update11.08.2025
For more information
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/projets-ecoresponsables-luxembourg.html
Top 5: environmentally friendly innovative projects
Global warming, CO2 emissions, flooding, drought, the list goes on... The environmental dangers threatening our planet have become more and more extreme. Thankfully, environmental commitments have also increased in tandem. In Luxembourg, a broad range of associations are competing in terms of ingenuity to offer innovative and environmentally responsible projects. We have put together a selection of initiatives in this area which is taking shape across the Grand Duchy.
Äerdschëff: an ode to nature
In 2019, an unusual-looking building arose from the earth inRedange-sur-Attert. For two years, volunteers from across Europe took part in this project, piling up tyres, cans and glass bottles in order to construct a sustainable building. This innovative piece of architecture which looks like a spaceship is calledÄerdschëffand belongs to the family ofearthships.
The developers behind this project, in particular theCenter for Ecological Learning Luxembourg (CELL), were inspired by the American architectMike Reynolds, a proponent of ecological architecture based on the recycling of materials, who in the 1970s, designed the famousearthshipsin the desert in New-Mexico.
Äerdschëff is aground-breaking and sustainable construction project, which delivers innovative solutions in terms ofcircular design. The structure is self-sufficient and manages its own resources. Its energy needs are sourced via solar panels, rainwater is collected and the heating comes from ventilation systems. Therefore, there is no need to pay extortionate electricity bills or go to the supermarket as the building is self-sufficient in terms of food and energy supply.
The tyres are filled with earth and pilled one on top of the other and become walls. The round shape of these rubber spheres symbolise circularity, however, questions may be raised about its ecological footprint. Nevertheless, the people in charge of the Äerdschëff are able to offer reassurance. The reason they use tyres is that they are the most economical means available and they claim that they are not in contact with the air. Moreover, they do not emit any gas. A study on air quality in 2016 in collaboration with the National Health Laboratory has backed up this claim.
As well as being a sustainable building, the Äerdschëff is mainly an educational space for learning, research and teaching about the circular economy, whichoffers young people vocational trainingin the field of renewable energy.
The goal of theworkshopsis twofold: to teach young people about climate change and inspire them to develop skills and possible solutions to our destructive lifestyle, stated the CELL officials.
The Äerdschëff initiative has received the support of the National Research Fund via thePromoting Science to the Public (PSP)programme.
IAMBAG: the canvas handbag
Protecting the environment and combating waste are issues that have attracted a lot of interest from theLuxembourg City Tourist Office (LCTO). Thanks to theirIAMBAGproject, the LCTO has filled two needs with one deed.
To promote its main events, such as "Rock um Knuedler", "MeYouZik" and the "Blues’n Jazz Rallye", the LCTO uses banners and placards.
However, each year, after the events a huge amount of advertising material was left over. In order to ensure that they did not just become cumbersome waste, the LCTO had the idea ofgiving a second life to these old advertising banners and placards.
As such, the IAMBAG project was born! In cooperation with a communications agency, the tourist office started to make bags from banners and fabrics left over from their events, an initiative that is closely aligned with the spirit of thecircular economy.
The shoulder bags and handbags created by this initiative are not only distinguished by their durable and unique material, they alsocontribute to the social integrationof people who have been excluded from the labour market. These products were created byKielener Atelier de l’ATP a.s.b.l.(Ateliers thérapeutiques et protégés) is an association which works with people with mental illness.
If you like original accessories and want to support a good cause, then the IAMBAG is made for you!
A cup to protect the environment
The best form of waste is that which is not produced! It was, without a doubt, with this idea in mind that the aldermen of the City of Luxembourg created the"Cup2Go"in order to combat "littering". The municipality now offers its citizens the opportunity to use areusable cup when purchasing a hot drinkto take away in town. At present, there are about 50 establishments taking part in this initiative.
The small porcelain cup ispractical, waterproof and above all sustainable.As such, customers no longer need to utilise single-use cups and at the same time they reduce waste. Furthermore, shoppers cantake advantage of various benefits when purchasing their drinks, such as a discount on the purchase of a hot drink to takeaway or stamps on their loyalty card, or even a small gift, such as a biscuit, cake, etc. To find a establishment taking part in this initiative, check out the interactive map oncup2go.vdl.luwhich includes the location, a photo of the business and the reward they offer to their eco-friendly customers or just look out for a "Cup2Go" sticker on the shop window.
The interactive card can also be consulted incityapp-VDLand viacityshopping.lu.
EcoLabel - promoting sustainable tourism
It is not always easy to find your way through themyriad of labels linked to sustainable tourism.In the Grand Duchy, theEcoLabelis mainly used for tourist establishmentsand it provides a clear vision of a commitment to sustainable tourism. Its goal is to promote accommodation establishments in Luxembourg which operate in an environment and climate friendly way.
Establishments wishing to showcase their environmentally friendly credentials in this field must satisfy fairly strict criteria. Accommodation facilities that wish to receive the EcoLabel must take measures to save energy, reduce water consumption and waste, which have an impact on reducing environmental pollution. They must also stand out from other establishments on the market by offeringa range of fresh, regional, organicand fair trade products. These businesses must also demonstrate their commitment to improving their environmental performance, through better management of waste, cleaning products and methods.
The EcoLabel is mainly awarded tohotels, campsites, youth hostels, group accommodation and rural bed & breakfast establishments. Applications for the label must be submitted totheOekoZenter Lëtzebuerg. The centre carries out an in-depth diagnosis in the fields of energy, water, waste, environmental management and procurement, setting out the criteria achieved and the areas for improvement.  This diagnosis allows the application stakeholders to prepare for the certification audit.
If all the criteria are met, the establishment is then awarded thelabel by the Directorate General of Tourism, in collaboration with the Department of the Environment. Applications for the label are voluntary and may only be submitted by establishments offering overnight accommodation.
The EcoLabel is awarded in the form of a diploma and a plaque which must be displayed where it is clearly visible to customers. It is valid for three years.
Green events or how to organise eco-friendly parties
Whether it is an indoor or outdoormusic festival, sports event, fair or exhibition, events for the general public often have an impact on the environment and the climate. These large gatherings consume a lot of energy in terms of heating, cooking or lighting, and the organisers as well as the guests or the public must also travel and eat. Therefore, they produce a lot of waste.
Nevertheless, these events are also the ideal opportunity toraise awareness of environmentally friendly behaviour. With this in mind and with the aim of reducing the ecological footprint of events, the Luxembourg government, in collaboration withthe Ëmweltberodung Lëtzebuerg a.s.b.l. and SuperDrecksKëscht, runs the Green Events project.
The objective of this initiative, which mainly targetsassociations, municipalities, unions, federations, clubs, as well asregional tourism officesandnature reserves, is to raise awareness of current sustainable development issues while seeking to reduce the negative impact on the environment and inhabitants.
To support the organisers which have adopted a sustainable strategy, theËmweltberodung Lëtzebuerg a.s.b.l.andSuperDrecksKëschtoffer professional assistance in order to deliver a more environmentally friendly event. On thegreenevents.luInternet platform, interested parties can findgeneral information, advice and helpful addresses. Interactive workshops or tailor-made individual consultations provide direct contact with the organisers.
In addition to assistance,a logo is attributed to participantswho undertake to organise sustainable and environmentally conscious events, as a reward for their efforts. An organiser who fulfils all the mandatory criteria for a specific event will be awarded theGreen Events logoand will be eligible for a grant. Organisers who do not meet all of the mandatory criteria, but who satisfy at least half of the criteria, will receive the"Mir engagéieren eis" logo.
Ech kafe clever: the environmentally friendly way to go back to school
Each new school year means an endless list of new school supplies to purchase. It comes with the pleasure of filling a school bag with notebooks, markers, erasers, rulers or correctors in all colours. However, this exercise can also be done in an environmentally responsible manner,by filling a school bag with sustainable, recycled and chemical-free materials. This is where the "Ech kafe clever" initiative comes to the rescue! It helps parents who would like toadopt a greener approach to back-to-school supplies. The aim of this initiative is therefore to support families by offering genuinely ecological and sustainable school supplies.
What makes this initiative unique in Europe is thatit also takes health criteria into account. Too often school bags are filled with new, disposable or plastic supplies, and they are also packed with chemicals, such as glues that contains toxic solvents, strong-smelling markers and even pencils that children can put in their mouths. If the products are harmful, the ech kafe clever initiative does not recommend them. However, products that have been tested and found to be non-polluting will be sold with the "Clever akafen" logo.
The "Ech kafe clever" initiative is also expanding into theworkplace. All those little items that we use in the office on a daily basis are now getting on the green wagon! These supplies must not only be harmless to the user, but also have no negative impact on the environment. To this end, office equipment has also been included in the "Ech kafe clever" campaign toprotect employees' health and uphold environmental standards.
The "Ech kafe clever" campaign was launched up a few years ago by Ëmweltberodung Lëtzebuerg, SuperDrecksKëscht, Greenpeace, the Ministry of the Environment, Climate and Sustainable Development and the Ministry of Education.
Last update09.02.2026
For more information
Electric mobility gathers speed in Luxembourg
Ethical shopping in Luxembourg
Energy Efficiency
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/clever-fueren-mesures.html
Clever fueren: a major boost for electric mobility
Good news for motorists who want to switch to a zero-emission vehicle. TheClever fuerenfinancial support packages have been extended for an additional 24 months. 100% electric motor vehicles, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles as well as conventional bicycles and pedal-assisted bikes will continue to be covered by this scheme.
Currently, there are17,425 electric carson Luxembourg's roads, which corresponds to a market share of 3.9%. However, there is still room for improvement to achieve the target of 49% by 2030, which was set by the government as part of theNational Integrated Energy and Climate Plan (PNEC).
To reduce this gap, and to tackle the oil crisis, the government has just upped the ante. As such, thefinancial supportto promote the mobility of tomorrowhas been extended by an additional 24 monthsuntil the end of March 2024.
The financial support of8,000 euros, introduced as part of theNeistart Lëtzebuergprogramme, will be maintained for 100% electric cars, provided that the vehicle's electrical energy consumption does not exceed 180 Wh/km, i.e. electric vehicles with a consumption of no more than 18 kWh/100 km.
A new condition has been imposed though. The threshold has been extended to 200 Wh/km, provided that the maximum net power of the 100% electric car's propulsion system is less than or equal to 150 kilowatts.The new provisionprovides that the minimum holding period shall be increased from 7 to 12 months for all vehicles registered in the Grand Duchy.
You can find all the information on thefinancial aidavailable on the websitewww.klima-agence.lu. You can also contact myenergy advisors on the hotline 8002 11 90.
Applications for financial aid must be completed viawww.guichet.luand will then be processed by the Environmental Administration.
Good news for large families!
For themost energy-intensive carswhose electrical energy consumption exceeds the threshold of 180 Wh/km, the subsidy of3,000 euroshas been extended.
The special conditions for large families have been maintained. In other words, to satisfy the needs oflarge families, a subsidy of 8,000 euros has been allocated for cars with seven or more seats, provided that the applicant is part of a household of at least five people.
From this point onwards, a subsidy of up to 600 euros will be allocated following the purchase of anew bicycle(+ 100%). This sum will rise up to 1,000 euros for the purchase of a newquadricycle, motorbike or electric moped.
The new measures apply to cars ordered or purchasedbetween 1 April 2022 and 31 March 2024with first entry into service before the end of 2024.
Key figures
In2021, almost one in five cars sold in Luxembourg was an electric vehicle. Overall,9,092 zero-emission vehicles(100% electric or plug-in hybrids) were registered at the end of last year, representing a market share of 20.5%.
Over the course of the past three years, the State has awarded almost37 million euros in State subsidiesfor electric cars.
Last update17.10.2025
For more information
'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg': the waste prevention strategy
Organic farming
Gringgo: fair and ethical trade in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/ethical-shopping-luxembourg.html
Ethical shopping in Luxembourg
The protection of human rights and the environment are major challenges for our society and many citizens are playing an active role on a daily basis. Ethical shopping is one of the first steps that a caring consumer can take in order to bring about change. Follow us on a journey of ethical food and clothes shopping in Luxembourg: we can point you in the right direction in terms of good ideas, shops and positive initiatives and help you to embrace social engagement and eco-friendly consumer choices.
Local, seasonal, organic and fair - the food on our plate
We eat several times a day, so the choices we make concerning the food we buy and cook have an immediate impact on the environment.Sustainable foodrefers to the consumption oflocal and seasonal produce from fair trade, organic or integrated agriculture.
Where can I buylocal and seasonal products?Fresh produce marketssell seasonal fruit, fresh vegetables and locally sourced meat which will make your mouth water! It's an ideal solution for ethical shoppers. In Luxembourg City, theStater Maart(on Wednesdays and Saturdays, Place Guillaume) theBouneweger Maart(on Tuesdays, Place Léon XIII) are the largest local markets. Also, theGlacismaartis open every third Sunday of the month, from March to November.
If you're looking forfair tradeproducts,Gringgois the place to go! Its produce is available via its websitegringgo.lu. Following its motto 'Don't wait, act', the cooperative is a marketplace for suppliers and, above all, consumers who are looking to embrace a fairer form of trade. Herbal teas, pasta, tinned organic vegetables, oils or honey, among others items, are available online. You can opt for healthier food choices while supporting the regional economy and nurturing social cohesion.
The newcomer to fair trade isKilogram.lu. The company's commitments are based on three pillars:local, organic and packaging-free. Indeed, the producers and artisans with whom Kilogram works are less than 100km from their warehouse, the products they sell are certified organic or Demeter and consigned in reusable jars, reducing packaging to a strict minimum. With its "Simply Sustainable" moto, the website offers asimple online shopping solution to consume locally and reduce waste at the same time.
Working together to tackle food waste
Did you know that one-third of food produced globally is wasted?At the same time, approximately one billion people across the world suffer fromhunger. Besides the moral obligation to tackle this affliction, we must not ignore theecological scaleof the problem. In fact, one third of all cultivable land is exploited unnecessarily, with huge amounts of water wasted: up to 250km3 per year! On top of that figure, let us not forget the 3.3 gigatonnes of CO2 released into the atmosphere.
What can we do?The website of theAnti-gaspi (Anti-waste)project offers tips on how to reduce your food waste on a daily basis; for example,plan your shopping tripin advance; don't break thecold chainand keep yourrefrigerator clean and tidyas food will last longer.
Finished shopping? It's time to cook and recycle properly
An anti-waste approach to purchasing should be supplemented bygood habitsin the kitchen, for example:
Second-hand offers a second life to clothes
Have you ever wonderedwhere, how and by whom your clothes are made? In ourglobal world, our clothes make a long journey, which is not always easy to follow, before they reach the shops. Furthermore, thesocial and environmental challengesof the global textile industry are immense.
An industry that exploits its workers and pollutes the planet
Of the 60 million people working in manufacturing, 80% are exploited women who receive extremely low wages, no social protection or cover and are often exposed to toxic substances. Moreover, fashion industry is one of the heaviest polluters in the world. Did you know, for example, that the intensive use of fertilisers or the monoculture of cotton, which uses a lot of water, has a negative impact on biodiversity and underground fauna?
On its website, theRethink Your Clothescampaign raises awareness and sounds the alarm onfast fashion, which has had a profound impact on the clothing-consumption habits of millions of people in recent years: trends are constantly changing, clothes are only kept for a few months and consumers are constantly pushed to buy more...What can we do? Consume less and make more ethical choices!
Currently,slow fashionoffers various alternatives:vintage,second-hand,rentaland labelled clothing, such asFairtradecertified products.
In Luxembourg,second-hand clothes shopshave the wind in their sales. Here is a small selection:
Donate your clothes and contribute to a good cause
Perhaps you don't feel like buying but would like to donate your clothes to a good cause? Through your purchases, would you like to support a non-profit organisation? Is this possible?
Of course! The second-hand shopVintage Mo(o)dis a project launched in 2016 by theRed Cross Luxembourg. It sells donated second-hand clothes. The shop is located in Livange; it is open to the general public and the organisation, using the proceeds of its sales, buys clothes more adapted to those in need.12 collection pointsare situated throughout the country to facilitate donations.
Last update31.10.2024
For more information
'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg': the waste prevention strategy
Gringgo: fair and ethical trade in Luxembourg
Organic farming
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/sustainable-urban-planning-luxembourg.html
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Sustainable urban planning, also known asenvironmentally friendly urban planning or ecological urbanism, aims to rethink spatial planning to recreate a symbiosis between the urban environment and nature. In Luxembourg, an urban planning strategy withpositive impactspromotes the creation of neighbourhoods where the citizen's quality of life is at the heart of the debate. This fresh approach to urban planning calls for a multidisciplinary strategy in which professionals in the sector, administrations and civil society work together.
Environmentally friendly urban development: the model of environmentally friendly neighbourhoods
Doing more than just reducing the negative impactsis one of the key factors in the new approach to environmentally friendly urban planning. In fact, it is not simply about minimising the effects of urban development on the environment and human beings, it aims tocreate positive outcomes.
Thepractical stepswhich aim to diminish the negative consequences on the urban environment are already well known: limiting light pollution or earthworks, for example. However, in order to create a positive impact, practical steps must gobeyond compliance with current regulations in order to achieve an optimal outcome. For example, the benefits of sunlight must be taken into account when developing a site and buildings in order to strike a balance between reducing summer overheating and maximising natural light and solar energy production.
Environmentally friendly neighbourhoods
To deliverenvironmentally friendly neighbourhoodsin Luxembourg, environmentally friendly urban planning with positive impacts places an emphasisthe cross-sectional approach, thelocal contextand thepermanent collaborative interaction.
With regard to the development of environmentally friendly neighbourhoods, Luxembourg published theEnvironmentally Friendly Urban Planning Guide(Guide éco-urbanisme) (July 2021). This guide is a tool to promote town and country planning based on 15 themes related to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, including Goals #3 Good Health and Well-Being, #11 Sustainable Cities and Communities, #12 Responsible Consumption and Production and #13 Climate Action.
The 15 themes, covering objectives and strategies, are structured into three main chapters:
Of specific interest is the fact that the practical steps to createpositive impactshavemultipleeffects on several themes at the same time. The implementation of an active mobility and public transport strategy is an ideal example: it not only has an impact on well-being (as neighbourhoods would have fewer vehicles on the roads and therefore less noise pollution), but also on health (by promoting cycling and better air quality).
The citizen, at the heart of ecological urbanism
One of the key aspects of the environmentally friendly approach is thatcitizens are at the heart of the strategy. The central role of human beings is expressed in two ways: on the one hand, they are thebeneficiaries of the positive impacts, and on the other hand,they are actively involved in the decision-making processas part of a permanent cooperation.
Well-beingandhealthare two essential factors linked tocitizens as the beneficiariesof urban development. Indeed, it is a question of building neighbourhoods that provide a high quality of life and allow the inhabitants to identify with their social environment and its developed surroundings. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to createenvironments on a human scale(neighbourhoods) or to offer avariety of urban atmospheresin which people of all ages live their lives to the full, among other factors. It is also important to ensureacoustic comfortand to encourage, for example,natural lightin order to benefit from its direct positive impact on health.
Luxembourg already has initiatives that promote environmentally friendly urban planning where the citizen is at the centre of the debate. For example, the village ofElmen, has fostered the concept of quality of life, sustainability and a blend of urban activities. In fact, it is not only a question of providingaffordable and partially subsidised housingowing to itsinnovative environmental advantages, but also of offering the future 2,000 inhabitants green spaces and an environment to promote the concept of "living together". The idea is toencourage inhabitants to reclaim the streetsand to travel by foot or bicycle when moving around the village. The local services will also foster thecreation of a community spirit, such as second-hand boutiques or sharing points to rent tools or household equipment.
On the other hand,co-creationandactive participationare the means by which thecitizen becomes a decision-maker. In fact, ecological urbanism nurtures multidisciplinary teamwork, the sharing of ideas and knowledge, andinvolves all stakeholdersin the planning, consultation andco-decision process. The know-how of professionals in the urban planning, landscape and construction sector (urban planners and landscape architects) remains essential because of their technical skills and their ability to propose positive solutions which extend beyond the regulations. Nevertheless, the design will pave the way for the civil society that will live in these new areas.
Le Neischmelz project in Dudelange
The objective of theNeischmelz project, which is developed by the Fonds du Logement, is to transform the former steel works in Dudelange into a carbon-neutral, environmentally friendly neighbourhood. From the beginning of the project, the city of Dudelange decided toinvolve its population as much as possible and to encourage its citizens to reclaim the spaces.
Even before the neighbourhood was built, temporary facilities and transitional activities were created. For example, theDKollektivartist collective took up residence in the Fondoucq hall. In 2019, in collaboration withFerroForum, they organisedAlerte Gourmande –Iessen op eege Gefor!(an artistic performance-culinary evening) to highlight the multiple influences of migration in the Red Rocks region. Following this event, the bookGudden Appetit!was published.
The role of the circular economy in environmentally friendly urban planning
In essence, the ultimate aim of thecircular economyis to create environmentally friendly neighbourhoods. Indeed, the circular economy is defined as aneconomic system of exchange and productionthat, at all stages of the life cycle of products (goods and services), aims to increase the efficiency of resource use and reduce the impact on the environment, while fostering well-being amongst human beings.
The dismantling of the Jean Monnet building
In contrast to the classic linear model of 'extract-produce-use-discard', the circular economy creates and maintains value via the principles of sharing, repairing and reusing, among others. Thedismantling of the Jean Monnet building, in Kirchberg, is a successful example of this strategy. The intention was not to demolish the building at the end of its life. Instead, the aim was to sort the materials in order to re-use them. In all, 400 tonnes of aluminium, 45 tonnes of wood and 150 tonnes of glass were recycled in regional factories, creating adual added value - both economic and environmental.
With regard tobuilding materials in environmentally friendly neighbourhoods, the objective is to make the most of what already exists and to apply the principles of the circular economy to ensure optimal waste reclamation of the buildings and its resources at the end of its useful life.
Last update31.10.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Energy Efficiency
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/energy-efficiency.html
Energy Efficiency
Heat pump heating, wall insulation and thermal glazing are generally known techniques for saving energy. But energy performance is a real catalyst for innovation and the possibilities for optimising energy sources are more diverse. We inform you about the energy performance certificate (CPE) and the 'Klimabank an nohaltegt Wunnen' package, and present the 'Mamerhaff', an outstanding example in the field of energy renovation!
Energy renovation: the "Mamerhaff"is a remarkable and awarded example
The 'Mamerhaff', a family project, is about the transformation of the grandparents' farm into twodwellingsand acentre for alternative medicine and family meetings. The architectural reinterpretation of the building goes hand in hand with its functional and energy optimisation. It was awarded the special prize "Exemplary Energy Renovation" in theBauhärepräisof the Order of Architects and Consulting Engineers (OAI) 2020.
Mamerhaff
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Arnaud De Meyer and Christian Liewer, associate architect and 'project manager' architect at theSTEINMETZDEMEYERstudio, were in charge of the renovation of the 'Mamerhaff'. The characteristics of their projects are always site-specific and specific to the physical and cultural environment of the place. From the very beginning of the planning process,sustainable development(energy, health, building quality, material savings and environmental preservation) isparamount.
Theformer dwellinghas beenrestored and transformedinto a 21st century home, whilerespecting the original structureand preserving the testimony of the building. The old barn with its stone arch is now the main entrance to the medical offices. The second habitation is on the other side of the old shed.
The challenge was topreserve the character of the architectureof one of the last well-preserved farmhouses in the centre of the village, while integrating its new functions. In addition, the layout of the existing building on the site no longer corresponded to the new regulations of the municipality. But thislandmark in the village, full of emotional memories, has been preserved, including the surrounding trees, which are also part of its heritage. This sustainable approach was supported by theNational Sites and Monuments Service.
The barn and dairywere gutted from behind and the roof structurewas deconstructed.New wooden spaceswere subsequently built behind the façade while preserving the existing openings. Thelarge roof has been rebuilt with metal louvres, to provide discretion and to act as a sunshade, which prevents overheating and manages energy input.
"The first characteristic of sustainability is that it lasts! You always have to ponder, do we really have to demolish or can we keep what exists? It is more sustainable to keep what is already there." Arnaud De Meyer
Thewooden constructionswere built with solid wood panels and wood fibre boards,with cellulose and sheep wool insulation(especially for the roof). Even thelift shaft, which connects the three floors of the common area, is made of wood! Wood, a recyclable and renewable material, has a low "grey energy", as it consumes little energy during its production and it allows to store CO2.
There are many exposed construction elements in the building, implying asaving on finishes from a financial point of view, but also considering ecology and sustainability. Only the necessary materials were consumed.
The shed at the back of the house has been replaced by a new building. A garage, a a multi-purpose space and the entire technical centre (pellet heating, hot water production,ventilation system, electrical panels, etc.) are located here. Due to the regulations to be complied with in such a mixed unit, the wooden construction is supplemented by solid structures for safety reasons (firebreaks etc.).
Insulation of the former main building was done from the insidewith sand-lime blocks to preserve the appearance and nature of the building. The original limestones easily absorb moisture and are very sensitive to frost, and therefore aquality and quantity analysis of the insulation materialwas necessary. This calculation was performed by aconstruction physicist.
Mamerhaff
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
"Sustainability is not only about the old walls, but also about all the small details that contain a lot of emotion. Old tiles or an old door, things that can be recycled in the house." Christian Liewer
Solar thermal and photovoltaic panelsare installed on the roof of the hangar. The flat roofs of the new buildings aregreen roofswith local honey plants. These roofs not only supportbiodiversity, but also create aphase shift of rainwaterand thus avoid saturation of the wastewater network.
Throughout the house,underfloor heatinghas been installed to work with low temperature water and low consumption heating.
"From a distance you think, the farm hasn't changed too much. But from close up you can see that it's something new, something today. We are proud to have built something sustainable that allows the contemporary and the historic to live together." Arnaud De Meyer
A quality label
Theenergy performance certificate(CPE) defines theenergy performance of a residential building. Theclassification into the different energy performance categoriesfrom A (the best class) to I (the worst class) is based on the index ofprimary energy requirement, heating heat requirement and CO2 emissions.
Theenergy passport is compulsory. It isdrawn up by architects or consulting engineerswho are members of theOrder of Architects and Consulting Engineers(OAI) andexperts approvedby the Minister of Energy and Land Management. It isvalid for 10 years.
Differentgrants and subsidiesare available for therenovationof a building involving special energy efficiency efforts. Passive house, low-energy or positive-energy house, since 1 January 2017,every new constructionof a house in Luxembourg must correspond to a building with almost zero energy consumption.
"The building of tomorrow"
In 2016, the Luxembourg government presented the package 'Klimabank an nohaltegt Wunnen' (Climate Bank and Sustainable Housing). This project promotesa sustainable construction, sustainable energy refurbishment of residential buildingsandrenewable energy development in housing.
Thanks to thisprogramme, you cantake advantage of theKlimaPrêtto finance the energy and sustainable renovation of your home: The package also includes thesustainability certification system for new housing(LENOZ-Lëtzebuerger Nohaltegkeets-Zertifikat fir Wunngebaier). This attestation isa comprehensive sustainability assessment approachIt isoptional, but linked to financial support.
Aone-stop shophas been created for allhousing-related assistance. The websitewww.logement.lucontains all useful information on the subject.
TheIntegrated National Energy and Climate Plan(PNEC) formsthe basis of Luxembourg's climate and energy policy. It describes the measures taken to achieve national targets forgreenhouse gas emissions reductions,renewable energyandenergy efficiencyup to 2030. As improving the energy performance of buildings is beneficial for the climate, the plan foreseesnew provisions for functional buildings too.
Last update25.01.2024
For more information
MOAI.lu
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/agriculture-bio-interview-charel-noesen-trifolie.html
Organic farming
Luxembourg’s agriculture is currently in a state of upheaval. Many farmers are ready to move away from conventional agriculture and existing trade chains and embrace local direct marketing that appeals directly to customers. Sustainable production is also an alternative that is appealing to more and more farmers in Luxembourg, and is meeting with a clientele that is willing to go down this path with them. However, the road ahead is long, as Charel Noesen, an organic farmer from Cruchten in the centre of Luxembourg, points out, because rethinking takes time. And because the pioneers are setting themselves ever more ambitious goals in their quest for quality and sustainable production.
The limits of conventional agriculture
"TheTrifolie farm in Cruchten, a village of 600 people in the centre of Luxembourg, has been around for centuries and has been in the hands of one family for at least 150 years," says Charel Noesen, not without a certain pride in his voice. Thefarmer by conviction runs the farm together with his brothers Pol and Willy,hence the name of the farm.All three have committed themselves to organic farming, a decision in which Charel Noesen played a considerable part. So why the change?
"I studied environmental engineering," says Charel Noesen. "During my studies, I also became more interested in everything related to water.My studies always made me aware of the limits of conventional agriculture."He does not accept objections that organic production could not produce enough to feed people: "We have to rethink nutrition. Already today, two-thirds of the world’s land used for agriculture produces fodder for animal farming. Animal products, however, only make up about one third of the diet." His horror scenario would be if the rest of the world were to consume the same quantities as Europeans do.
"From ascientific point of view, there is no way around organic,"Noesen continues. "Politically, it is desirable for food to be cheap, but if you take into account the impact on biodiversity, water and soil pollution so-called true cost accounting thenconventionally produced food is more expensive than organically produced food."
Ambitious goals in Luxembourg
And what about awareness? Charel Noesen is optimistic: "Organic awareness is well established throughout Europe. The EU is clearly taking a pioneering role here , others don’t get it right." For Noesen, the EU label and the controls associated with it are the main reason why customers continue to trust it, despite many attempts at greenwashing, i.e. companies trying to give themselves an environmentally friendly image without sufficient basis.
True cost accountingis a method of price calculation thatnot only takes into account the price of raw materials, production and marketing, but also considers the impact on the natural and social environment. Accordingly, many products from conventional agriculture are actually more expensive than organically produced products if one takes into account the damage caused by their production.
But in Luxembourg they are pursuing more ambitious goals: "TheBioLëtzebuerglabelstands for rules that are even stricter than those that already apply in the EU. One example is livestock farming. The EU label stipulates that animals must have access to the outdoors – but the BioLëtzebuerglabel says that animals must have access to pasture."
The label is one of many initiatives by Luxembourg’s farmers.For example, many farms have expanded direct marketing. Direct marketing is a mainstay with potential for farmers,” says Noesen. "People get a direct insight into production, and the bottom line is that it’s more for the producers. Many farmers in Luxembourg are also dipping into organic farming, but there is still resistance because of the popular belief that organic cannot feed people. Products from conventional production can also be traded on a world market, which is not always possible with organic. Luxembourg milk, for example, is sold to China, but organic products have their market locally.And these local processing and marketing channels have yet to be established."
Expansion of assistance, counselling and controls
But is it worth it for the farmers? Because organic farming cannot produce the same quantities as conventional farming. "Organic farming always involves more effort," states Charel Noesen confidently. "However, we need a rethink of production - more and more and cheaper is not the answer." "The shift towards more organic farming is very slow," he explains. "Many farmers are getting advice, for example from Luxembourg’s Institute of Organic Agriculture and Agronomy (IBLA). And colleagues naturally see that we have a little less yield but don’t apply sprays and fertilisers from a bag, so that makes them curious."
Does the effort pay off? "Of course, this also means considerably more effort for the farmers, but Luxembourger farmer are going along with it," Noesen says optimistically.
"A lot of things are still designed for conventional agriculture today," he regrets. "But some things are starting to happen at the moment. For example, aid for organic farming is being increased and extension and monitoring are being expanded."
Despite much opposition, Luxembourg has committed itself to the goal that20% of its agricultural products should come from organic production by 2025. Charel Noesen considers this an ambitious goal.
For the curious
In 2017, Charel, Pol and Willy Noesen took over their parents’ farm together.The three brothers have dedicated themselves to different areas, with the aim of running a sustainable and transparent farm in harmony with nature and with respect for animals and the soil. Charel is currently pushing ahead with laying hen farming, while Willy is dedicated to vegetable growing and Pol to dairy farming. The farm is a member of the Luxembourg Association of Organic Agriculture.
Last update04.03.2026
For more information
IBLA - the biological research institute
Sustainable wines in the making
Cuisine? International.
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/superchargy-bornes.html
Electric mobility gathers speed in Luxembourg
The automotive sector has seen its electromobility sales take off in recent years, with an increasing number of electric and hybrid vehicle registrations. Luxembourg is supporting this environmentally friendly initiative by providing an extensive network of public charging stations, which are now available on the motorways.
Electromobility given a boost with Chargy and SuperChargy
A first step with the Chargy terminals
The network of public charging points for electric cars and plug-in hybrids was launched in the Grand Duchy in2017, it was given the nameChargy. In2022, more than700 charging stationsare available to users across the country on public car parks in the municipalities and on the P+R network, offering easy access to public transport. Theobjectiveis to reach a total of1,600 charging pointsdedicated to electric mobility.
Each station has twocharging points that can be adjusted between 3.7kW and 22kWdepending on the type of vehicle. All network charging points have a standardpaymentmethod: the multi-functionalChargy mKaartsmart card. Users must subscribe with a charging service provider in order to access the stations using their Chargy card. The service also offers several other options: users can view their electricity charges, locate charging stations and reserve a charging point. To take advantage of these services, just go to themy.chargy.luwebsite or theChargy mobile app.
There is an increasing number of charging stations forprivate customers. They are called Chargy OK and are connected to the public network: these stations are compatible with the Chargy platform and can be used in the same way.
Ultra-fast charging with SuperChargy
Luxembourg has moved up a gear with the deployment of a new generation of charging stations:SuperChargy. The first ultra-fast charging stations came into service in2021in the car park of the University Luxembourg – Kirchberg Campus. Now, they are spread across the country. The aim is toinstall 90 charging stations by 2024.
On 27 June 2023,the first "SuperChargy" public ultra-fast charging stationsfrom the "Kempower" brand were inaugurated in Pontpierre. The symbolic opening of this station along the A4 towards Esch-sur-Alzette marks not only the continued densification of the "SuperChargy" network, but also the integration of the new generation of ultra-fast charging points. "With more than 3,000 publicly accessible charging points for a total fleet ofover 30,000 registered electric cars, the Grand Duchy continues to have one of the densest charging networks in the European Union. It is vital that the number of charging stations continues to grow in line with the number of electric vehicles. What's more, ultra-fast recharging stations, like this one at the Pontpierre area, are crucial for long-distance travel across Europe in a 100% electric car", says the Minister for Mobility, François Bausch.
SinceJuly 2022, theSuperChargy stationsare available on themotorwaysof Luxembourg, at the areas ofCapellen(service area on the motorway to Belgium) and inBerchem(motorway to France). Ateach of these charging stations, a total of six charging pointsare now operational. As such, Luxembourg is now ready to welcome people who want to travel across the country in 100% electric car.
With the introduction of SuperChargy charging points, the charging power has increased considerably: they supplybetween 160kW and 350kW, depending on the configuration of the site and the capabilities of each vehicle. They can be used with thesame means of identification and payment as the standard Chargy stations. Moreover, users who do have not entered into acontract with a charging service providercanalso pay with a bank cardat a fixed price displayed on the screen of the charging terminal.
With the recent initiatives carried out by private stakeholders, who have installed ultra-fast charging points near motorway junctions, there is nowone ultra-fast charging station on the trans-European road transport network in Luxembourg every 20km on average, in both directions.
By2024, a total of90 ultra-fast charging stationswill be located at18 stations and service areason motorways andother main arterial roadsin the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Subsidies for private charging stations
To encourage more people to adopt electric and 'soft' mobility options, and thus contribute to the development of clean, sustainable mobility, a new subsidy has been introduced for the purchase and installation ofnew electric-vehicle charging stations. Only natural persons who own or lease the parking space where the charging station is to be installed may apply for this subsidy.
The financial aid is granted for investments made between 1st July 2020 and 30th June 2023 inclusive. Applications must be filed no later than 12 months after the last invoice issued in connection with the investment.
The subsidy covers 50% of the cost, excluding VAT, to purchase and install the charging station, with different thresholds depending on the type of building where the charging station is located.
Last update14.06.2024
For more information
Focus on renewable energies
'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg': the waste prevention strategy
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/null-offall-strategie-waste-prevention-strategy.html
'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg': the waste prevention strategy
Luxembourg aims to significantly reduce the amount of waste produced nationwide. In this context, a roadmap has been drawn up to achieve this target. The strategy is based on the principle of the circular economy.
The best waste is waste we don't produce. In theory, this behaviour is the best way to combat waste production, but given our current economic model, putting it into practice remains a major challenge.
Yet, the willpower to walk away from the linear consumerism model and commit to a circular economy has never been as palpable as now. With its strategy known as'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg', Luxembourg set itself the objective ofdrastically reducing wasteandmanage its resources moreresponsibly and sustainablywhile relying on principles of thecircular economy.
This roadmap is a cornerstone in the process, andwaste preventionis one of its main pillars.
Themes and objectives of the 'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg' strategy
The crusade against food waste
The 'Null Offal Lëtzebuerg' presents concrete measures to reach certain targets and sustainable development objectives. It describes the key themes to be developed and proposes specific avenues for each of these themes.
One of these themes isfood waste, which, given its high rates in the Grand Duchy, became part of 'Null Offall Lëtzebuerg'. Every year, thousands of tons of food end up in the bin - and almosthalf the losses could be avoided.
Every citizen or consumer contributes to this waste on a daily basis, which affects the entire food production and consumption chain, from the field to the plate, including the preparation (industrial or otherwise) of meals.
Infigures, a Luxembourger produces193.7kg of waste(grey bin) per year, including around 88.5kg that can be attributed to household consumption (food waste). 53,250 tons of food are eliminated each year. For the approximately 603,000 inhabitants (2018 status), this figure represents around 75% of overall food waste.
Analysis of residual waste in Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
Study on food waste (Video/Audio YouTube)
Moreover,an analysis of 2018/2019 by the Administration of the Environmentalso reveals food waste in the fields of gastronomy (5,250 tons per year), collective restauration (7,100 tons) and retail (5,150 tons).
Each year, together with households, these three sectors produce70,800 tons of food waste in the Grand Duchy. Each citizen throws away 118kg of food on average per year, of which about 48kg is presumably avoidable.
Last update12.06.2023
For more information
Cap sur les énergies renouvelables
Pic historique de l’énergie solaire au Luxembourg
IBLA – l'institut à la recherche du biologique
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/sustainable-wines-moselle-luxembourg.html
Sustainable wines in the making
Luxembourg's wines and crémants enjoy a very high reputation far beyond the borders of the Grand Duchy; a reputation that is founded in a millennia-old winemaking tradition. In Luxembourg, that tradition now extends into a paradigm shift in how grapes are grown: sustainability and organic viticulture are two concepts that have become very popular and have led to some groundbreaking developments in Luxembourg's vineyards. And the results are promising.
Sustainable winemaking in Luxembourg
Luxembourg has beenmaking a lot of headway in establishing a sustainable viticulture. It was thefirst country to formally ban the use of glyphosate, a controversial herbicide. Moreover, many other chemicals used for fertilisation and protection against parasitic fungi and insects have been phased out and replaced by organic, mechanical and natural means. The result: healthy vines and a perfect basis for the high quality wines Luxembourg has come to be known for.
So, how do Luxembourg's vintners deal with the sustainability challenge?
"Many vintners already use methods common to organic winemaking,"thus Serge Fischer, head of the Viniculture Department atLuxembourg's Wine Institute(Institut viti-vinicole, IVV). "Luxembourg's legislators provides for a partial conversion of a vineyard in order to start with organic winemaking. This way, vintners can split the risks over several years" he adds, indicating that the transition is far from peril-free.
Better wines through organic means
Among those risks are first and foremost the different fungi which can rot grapes before the harvest and severely damage the vineyard. A risk that the Wine Institute already has in its sights:
"The protection of vines against fungi and insects is one pillar of sustainable vineyard management. The use of synthetic phytosanitary products is prohibited: this strategy is essentially based on the use of products of natural origin," says Serge Fischer.
If you pass along the Moselle and see drones flying over a vineyard, chances are good that it belongs toCorinne Kox, who is fighting fungi that damage her vines. The Luxembourger, whose family has been making wines for over 100 years, is riding the new technologies wave so as to protect her vines.
Corinne Cox, who is pioneer of this technology in Europe, confirms that the aerial treatment diminishes not only the risk of accidents, but thedroneis also much more easy to handle and precise. Indeed, Domaine Kox's drone brings out the treatment less than 2 metres over the vines with great precision.
Te learn more about this technology, wetalked to the vintner and invite you to read the interview.
However, it's not only fungi that the IVV targets – certain types of insects are also damaging vines and grapes and may become a bane of Luxembourg's vintners if unchecked.
The grape worm in particular is the vintners' nemesis. This small insect boroughs into the grapes and leaves small openings on the grapes' surface, through which rot can enter. In order to limit its expansion, the IVV uses sexual confusion, which Serge Fischer explains: "Sexual confusion is achieved by using synthetic pheromones, reproducing the hormonal scent of female butterflies. This saturates an area with female pheromones, where it will be more difficult for the males to find the females to mate. This limits the production of eggs, and therefore of caterpillars."
Luxembourg's wine-growing region is the first to apply this strategy on a large scale. Everywhere throughout the vineyards, the small red-brownish containers help the vintners to achieve the quality they are famed for. The result is fewer chemical agents in the vines – and on the grapes, and ultimately the wine. Serge Fischer even goes so far as to claim that this strategyreplaces the entirety of insecticides that had to be used before.
The IVV leads the charge
And the IVV leads by good example, as Serge Fischer explains: "The vineyards of the IVV are run organically. In addition, we have set up a large test with grape varieties that are naturally tolerant or even resistant to fungal diseases."
While the IVV was at its core aimed at fighting the invasion of certain types of fungi, its role has become much more important in Luxembourg.
Serge Fischer sees the IVV's role as that of an advisor in viticulture. "This advice covers all aspects of wine production: choice of grape variety, vine cultivation and protection of the vine against diseases. We regularly send recommendations and organise seminars for vintners." These seminars include administrative procedures, as well as strategies for a more sustainable vineyard management, all in the interest of giving Luxembourg's vintners the best shot at doing what they do best:renowned wines of excellent quality.
Last update11.03.2026
For more information
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
IBLA - the biological research institute
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/gringgo-fair-and-ethical-trade-in-luxembourg.html
Gringgo: fair and ethical trade in Luxembourg
'Don't wait, act!' This is the motto ofGringgo, a cooperative based in the canton ofRedange. It offers consumers and suppliers the opportunity to advance towardsfairtrade. This company founded in 2017 contributes to the development of an innovative and sustainable economic area set amidst the hills of Western Luxembourg. Itsonline shop,gringgo.lu, not only offers products and services, but alsoBekis, the canton's currency!
Products, services and a regional currency!
Over twenty partners of the Gringgo project offer their products and services in the online shop.
The range ofproductsoffered includes textiles, kitchen utensils, care and cosmetic products, cleaning products and foodstuffs, among others. ​
The website also features the provision ofservices. For instance, you will find suppliers of green electricity and CO2-compensated natural gas, builders of FSC/PEFC wooden houses and other sustainable materials, or redesigning antique furniture to create a real vintage atmosphere in your home.
TheBekiis probably the most alternative one out of the products and services offered by Gringgo. It is the currency of the canton of Redange, managed by the associationDe Kär. The basic idea behind theBekiis to link purchasing power to the canton and to promote the regional economic circuit. In fact, if you buy someBekisfor purchase purposes, you encourage these businesses to re-use them to buy from other local businesses.
Zero waste advice and sustainable alternatives
The cooperative's website also offers advice for a more environmentally friendly daily life. Did you know, for instance, that beeswax fabric was an alternative to foil and cling film? In fact, in most households, these two single use products are frequently used and often instill a bad conscience.
The website not only offers organicbeeswax fabricsin its shop, but also tips to create your own should you feel like experimenting and committing yourself wholeheartedly!
Gringgo's principle for suppliers: a guarantee for consumers
'More and more people think that we manage our economy badly. Environmental damage, the climate crisis, a growing gap between rich and poor, global exploitation, a middle class increasingly under pressure, etc. But these are not the only options! ​ Alternatives exist', insists Max Hilbert, a member of Gringgo's Board of Directors.
In the face of these challenges, Gringgo wants to act consciously and encourage producers and consumers to build a socially fair and sustainable economy. It is aboutstrengthening regional circuits,broadening sustainable economic activityandenhancing social cohesion.
Suppliers wishing to appear on the platform must act in accordance with theprinciples of the Gringgo cooperative, which evaluates proposals based on a catalogue of ethical and sustainable development criteria:
Moreover, the company's registered office, sales outlet or branch office must be located in theLEADER region of Atert-Wark, i.e. the canton of Redange and the municipality of Mertzig.
Compliance with these principles is a guarantee for consumers who wish to change their consumption habits but can sometimes be lost among the many labels that the market offers. It is above all a local commitment that plays a major role here.
So, it's a great starting point for local consumption - something that's been on your mind for a while!
Last update27.01.2023
For more information
Focus on renewable energies
Quality of life
Sustainable wines in the making
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/energies-renouvelables.html
Focus on renewable energies
Renewable energies are constantly on the rise, steadily gaining ground on the path to energy transition. Luxembourg is on the right track to reach its objective with its green energy development support project, 'Gréng relance fir Lëtzebuerg'.
Renewable energiesare still on the rise within the European Union, which has set the goal for green energy to reach32% of energy usage by 2030.
In the face of this major goal, Luxembourg is strengthening some of the measures of itsNational Energy and Climate Plan, which it has just sent to the European Commission. This blueprint describes the policies and measures in place to reach the national objectives in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions (-55%), renewable energies (25%) and energy efficiency (40 to 44%) on the 2030 horizon.
"CleverWunnen": two stones, one throw
Everything has been well defined for the periods 2020-2021 and 2021-2030. In the short term, it is about reaching out tocraft businessesso they can get back on their feet in the aftermath of the pandemic, while strengtheningthe sector's support programmes(Neistart Lëtzebuerg).
Increases in financial aidfrom the package'Gréng Relance fir Lëtzebuerg - E Plus fir d'Klima, d'Handwierk an d'Bierger'have also been put in place to encourage sustainable upgrading of energy efficiency for housing. The programme'CleverWunnen'is part of the official blueprint on the path to energy transition, which is reflected in a significant reduction of energy usage and a drastic reduction of Co2 emissions.
In practice, this transition can be seen in the adoption of regulations, programmes and projects in specific fields between 2020 and 2030. But for private individuals, it is essentially manifested by attractive financial aid for upgrading energy efficiency.
Financial aid
Clever fueren and Clever lueden: supporting soft mobility
Mobility related aidis also granted in the context of the programme 'Gréng Relance fir Lëtzebuerg – E Plus fir d’Klima, d’Handwierk an d’Bierger'. It provides for purchase premiums for bicycles and pedelecs as well as for quadricycles, motorcycles, electric mopeds and cars. These are reinforced for allpurchases until the end of the 1st quarter 2021.
From now on,up to €600is allocated to the purchase of a new bicycle (+ 100%),up to €1,000to the purchase of a new electric quadricycle, motorcycle or moped (+ 100%), as well asa flat-rate bonus of €8,000(+ 60%) to the purchase of a new 100% electric car/truck. As for"plug-in" hybrid vehicles(≤ 50 g CO2/km), the premium granted is always €2,500. (Eligible are vehicles ordered until the end of the 1st quarter of 2021).
But also at the level of the recharging infrastructure, efforts will be doubled. In addition to the establishment of a network of public charging stations,bonuses for home charging stationswill be extended to accelerate the transition to electric mobility.
Practical information
All the information onfinancial aidis available on theKlima Agencewebsite. You can also reach myenergy advisors on the hotline 8002 11 90.
Applications for financial aid must be completed viawww.guichet.luand will then be processed by the Environmental Administration.
Please note that the low-interest and 0% interestclimate loansare still available to anyone willing to upgrade energy efficiency.
Last update19.08.2025
For more information
All-time high in solar energy in Luxembourg
IBLA - the biological research institute
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/all-time-high-solar-energy-in-luxembourg.html
All-time high in solar energy in Luxembourg
The high number ofsunshinehours in spring coupled with an increase in thephotovoltaic surface areaover recent years have been key factors in reaching a historical peak of solar energy in Luxembourg in March and April 2020. In addition,teleworkingduring the weeks of lockdown had a positive influence on electricity demand, which declined. The transition toclimate neutralityseems to be making great strides.
A photovoltaic boom in Luxembourg
With 306.3 hours of sunshine in April, which is well above average, the exceptional weather was one of the reasons behind the historical peak of solar energy in Luxembourg. Nevertheless, it is thanks to the considerable increase in theinstalled power of photovoltaic panelsthat this level of solar energy production - more than 42% compared to the same period in the previous year - could be achieved.
In fact, from March 1st 2014 to March 1st 2019, a total of 1,950 photovoltaic installations were subsidised via thePRIMeHousescheme, for a cost of EUR 9.6 million. As part of an energy policy geared towards a sustainable, secure and competitive energy supply, this financial aid is aimed at improving the energy performance of single-family houses or apartments.
All united for solar energy
Luxembourg wants to accelerate the timelines for renewable energies in order to reach around 25% clean energy by 2030 and 100% in the long term. With this in mind, the aid scheme for the promotion of photovoltaic energy has been strengthened since 2019 and increasingly involves private individuals. In addition to the PRIMeHousegrants, many other instruments are offered to implement different sustainable energy projects.
Would you like to play an active role in this sustainable energy transition? For more information aboutphotovoltaicsandfinancial supportfor individuals, please consult the website ofKlima-Agence, the national body for the promotion of a sustainable energy transition.
Teleworking - a tool to combat climate change
During lockdown, the electricity demand in Luxembourg declined by 28.1%, in particular in the banking sector. Many players in the tertiary sector have made use of teleworking, without affecting household demand for electricity.
On top of the potential for fostering a work-life balance, teleworking has proven to be atool for improving air quality and preventing congestion, as well as having a positive influence on the demand for electricity.
Last update25.01.2024
For more information
Sustainable development
SpaceTech start-ups - conquering space from the Grand Duchy
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development/ibla.html
IBLA - the biological research institute
TheInstitute for Organic Agriculture and Agrarian Culture Luxembourg(Institut fir biologesch Landwirtschaft an Agrarkultur Lëtzebuerg, IBLA) is a research Institute dedicated to organic agriculture in Luxembourg. In 2019, the IBLA was awarded theBio-Agrar-Präis. This is the second time that the IBLA has won this award, which is awarded annually to a person, organisation or company active in the organic farming sector. Organic agriculture is increasingly popular in Luxembourg: many Luxembourgers love organic and like to buy products accordingly. However, 'going organic' isn't easy and this prize has been designed to encourage those who take on a pioneering role in Luxembourg's organic sector.
Every year, the jury chooses another theme which has a direct link to organic farming or the organic market in Luxembourg. For 2019, the organisers decided to choose the laureate from among past winners of the prize. The goal was  to evaluate how these initiatives have developed in the past years.  And the clear winner was the IBLA. A perfect opportunity for us to meet up with IBLA director  Dr. Stéphanie Zimmer to talk organic.
What aims is the IBLA pursuing?
The IBLA is the Institute for Organic Agriculture and Agrarian Culture Luxembourg.Two fields of expertise are covered: counselling on the hand, and research and development on the other.
We mainlyadvise organic farms, but also conventional farms considering possibly switching to organic farming. If they decide to make the switch, we then give them advice and support.
As far as research is concerned, we focus on organic agriculture, but also on hot topics. For example, we are conducting research into the type of plannable wheat that not only gives the best yield, but also the best baking results.
Moreover, we carry outsustainability assessments of Luxembourg agricultureon four levels: economic, ecological, social and entrepreneurial. As an example,legumes is a focus of ours, i.e. peas, beans and soy. We currently have several projects in the area of protein self-sufficiency with the aim of reducing soy imports, in particular by establishing soy in Luxembourg.
True Cost Accounting– get to know the true value of products
Organic products are often more expensive... but is this really the case?True-Cost Accounting calculates the price of a  product not only on the basis of the production costs, but also on the basis of the costs incurred by the general public.The elimination of ecological damage or compensation by Kyoto measures are taken into account in this calculation. As a  result, conventional products are often more expensive  than organic products, even if the consumer's impression in the supermarket is often different.
Why are legumes so important for organic farming?
The IBLA has been working in the area of legumes since 2010: which ones are best suited to Luxembourg? How can we establish these species here? How must the processing process be constructed so that the farmer can make optimum use of his produce?
These legumes are very important in organic farming becausethey have a special ability. The air consists of 78% nitrogen and legumes can fix the nitrogen from the air at their roots with the help of bacteria: the plant gets the nitrogen it needs and the bacteria get energy to live in the course of this symbiosis.
This free nitrogen from the  aireliminates the need for mineral fertilisers. In addition, legumes improve soil fertility through  their highly developed root system.
However, legumes have been ignored for a long time: indeed, mineral fertiliser is much cheaper. However, rising energy prices and the climate debate – the production of mineral fertilisers requires a lot of energy and is therefore not particularly beneficial for the climate – mean that more use is being made of legumes.
How does Luxembourg fare in comparison with other countries or regions – thinking about the 'Greater Region'?
We already have a focus in this area, and in the Greater Region there is virtually no soya cultivation. We are in communication with Wallonia. Most soya is grown in Germany, in regions such as Bavaria or Baden-Württemberg, where the climate is somewhat warmer. That is why I would say thatwe are playing a pioneering role here.
The number of biological labels has increased in Luxembourg in recent years. How successful are organic products currently?
Overall, Luxembourg ranks 4th in Europe in terms of per capita expenditure on organic products.  In terms of production, however, we are relatively far down in the list. In other words, demand  outstrips what we produce in the country. Farmers in Luxembourg are still not always ready, or the general conditions are not always so favourable as to induce many farms to switch.
Organic challenges in viticulture
More and more vintners are getting interested in organic farming. However, very few do actually dare to switch completely -most opt for a partial transition. Some areas are therefore cultivated organically, while others are not. It should moreover be borne in mind that wine is a luxury product: the additional costs of organic production are not necessarily reflected in the purchase price which the buyer is prepared to pay.
To what is this reluctance among farmers due?
That's hard to say. On theone hand, you can't 'go organic' just like that. All operations on the farm need to be restructured. This implies that you have to plan your activities carefully and think well in advance about how you are going to react. Short-term tools, such as pesticides or mineral fertilisers, won't be an option anymore.
Moreover, generalconditions for organic farming are more strict. For some time marketing  organic foods was tough, and Luxembourgers often prefer to buy national products. To meet demand is already not easy with conventional agriculture, given Luxembourg's relatively small size. If you then take organic, where the area under cultivation is considerably smaller, it gets even more difficult. Here you have to think supra-regionally in order to find a solution. Once you reach a certain mass it becomes easier.
Currently, just under 5% of Luxembourg's agricultural land is farmed organically. Will these figures rise in the coming years?
I think so.For the past few years, the number of organic farms has been on the rise. It is certainly not a decision that you take from one day to the next, but many farms are interested and are in contact with our consultants. It remains to be seen how quickly the number will rise.
In 2019, the IBLA received the Bio-Agrar Award for the second time, as recognition for developments since the first award in 2011. Why this second award?
In 2007, the IBLA was only two of us; right now we are 12 people working here.The IBLA has built its reputation as a research institute, but has also obtained the status of a non-profit organisation. By means of fundraising and donations we try to finance part of our research in the future so that we can remain independent.
Thank you for having agreed to this interview.
Last update02.03.2023
For more information
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/family/help-vulnerable-family-luxembourg.html
Help for vulnerable families
The standard of living of a person or family is not defined by income alone. It is affected by various factors such as living and housing conditions, wealth, employment and education. The combination of these indicators makes it possible to establish whether their personal situation is adequate or perhaps modest. The Luxembourg socio-economic model seeks to maintain social cohesion, promote integration and guarantee equal opportunities for all. In this context, a series of measures are available to support vulnerable households.
Social protection policy
TheNational Solidarity Fund(Fonds national de solidarité, FNS) was created in 1960 by a law that was based on social assistance mechanisms by allocating means-tested benefits. From the outset, the fund was primarily a point of contact for self-employed workers whose social security could not sufficiently satisfy their needs in terms of social protection. At present, the FNS is responsible formanaging the payment of various social security benefitsaffecting, for example, single-parent families, the long-term unemployed or individuals with a severe disability.
Social inclusion income (REVIS)
In 2018, the Chamber of Deputies passed the law on the Social Inclusion Income (revenu d'inclusion sociale, REVIS), which replaced the Guaranteed Minimum Income (revenu minimum garanti, RMG) at the beginning of 2019. The REVIS has four objectives
The REVIS essentially consists of theinclusion allowance- a type of financial assistance providing a basic means of subsistence to individuals who have no income or whose income does not reach a certain threshold - and theactivation allowance- an allowance for people who take part in activation measures as part of the REVIS.
On the websitewww.revis.lu, the general public and eligible individuals can find all the relevant information, conditions, terms and procedures of REVIS.
How to benefit from the Social Inclusion Income (REVIS) (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to get the cost-of-living allowance and the energy allowance? (Video/Audio YouTube)
The cost-of-living allowance and the energy bonus
From 1 January to 31 October of the current year, low-income households that meet the conditions and procedures set out in the Government CouncilRegulationcan apply for the cost-of-living allowance (allocation de vie chère, AVC) and the energy bonus. The amounts of the allowance and the premium are determined according to the income of the applicant's domestic community, whether they are living alone or with several people. You'll find more information and the procedureshere.
Allowance for severely disabled persons (RPGH)
Individuals who are unable to work or who have obtained disabled employee status and who, for reasons beyond their control, do not have access to the job market or earn less than theRPGH, are entitled to the RPGH. The FNS is responsible for paying the benefit; however, the application to receive the RPGH is made via the Medical Commission Secretariat of the Employment Development Agency (Agence pour le développement de l'emploi, ADEM).
Did you know?
TheMinistry of Housingprovides rental assistance to low-income households. The sum varies between EUR 200 and EUR 400 per month. You can find all the information, the procedures to take as well as arent subsidysimulator on the Ministry'swebsite.
Obtaining an advance and recovering maintenance payments
A maintenance payment is a financial contribution paid to any person who requires maintenance. It is set by a legal ruling. The person requesting assistance must be in a difficult economic situation and have explored all legal avenues in order to obtain maintenance. This sum is paid and recovered by theFNS. The property of the debtor (the person who has to pay the maintenance) and the creditor (the person who will receive the maintenance) is subject to a mortgage registration in favour of the fund. This guarantees the restitution of benefits in the event of a return to better fortunes or in the event of succession.
Financial assistance to pay for gerontology services
The FNS contributes to the services provided as part of gerontological care for users of integrated centres (CIPA- integrated centre for the elderly), care homes and other supervised and approved accommodation. Thissupplementis issued to persons who are admitted to one of the aforementioned institutions on an indefinite basis, but who do not have the resources to cover the cost of accommodation and other personal needs. It is paid directly to the facility housing of the applicant.
Did you know?
The health system in Luxembourg is based on the values of solidarity, universal accessibility and equal treatment. Through the system of Universal Healthcare Cover, the Luxembourg Statepays the contributions for voluntary affiliation to health insurance of any vulnerable person, as well as any personal contribution that cannot be paid by this person due to insufficient financial means.
Social welfare
The amended law of 18 December 2009 on social welfare establishes a right to social welfare support and is aimed attackling poverty and social exclusion and enabling every person to lead a life of human dignity.
Social welfare support ensures that those in need and their families are able to gain access to products and services that are appropriate to their specific situation, so that they can gain or maintain their independence. The assistance may be palliative, curative or preventive in nature. It is based on short-, medium- or long-term welfare support; if need be, this support may be supplemented by a material aid, either in kind or in cash.
Any person legally residing in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourgis in principle entitled to social welfare support and may apply to the Welfare Office of the municipality in which they reside. There are 30 Welfare offices in Luxembourg, which are public establishments under the control of the Ministry for the Family, Integration and the Greater Region. A full list of Welfare offices can be found on theMinistry's website. The practical details of the steps to take in order to benefit from social assistance are explained onguichet.lu- the administrative portal of Luxembourg.
Food aid
There are approximately twelvefoods banksin Luxembourg and they provide vulnerable people with access to food and everyday items. Open five days a week, food banks are also places where people can meet and spend some time together. On average, items are two-thirds cheaper. In order to shop in a food bank, it is necessary to obtain an access card which can be requested from the Welfare Office of the municipality of residence or from other social services.
Useful information
Food banks are managed byCaritas and the Red Crossas well as "Den Cent Buttekasbl". They offer food and hygiene products. Thefood bankassociation works in field of collection and redistribution of food and other products.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Housing support bonuses and services to make you feel at home
Health and social security
Family allowances
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/family/mariages-partenariats.html
Marriages and partnerships
Are you and your partner planning to make your relationship official in the Grand Duchy?  Here's an overview of your options forsaying "I do" in Luxembourg.
Getting married is still popular in the Grand Duchy, withalmost 2,000 couples saying "I do" every year. Other interesting facts: over 10% of marriages are entered into between Luxembourgers and non-Luxembourgers, and around 50 same-sex marriages have been celebrated each year sincesame-sex marriage was made legal in 2015.
Marriage or civil partnership?
Various partnership options are available in the Grand Duchy, including marriage, of course, which is the most popular form of partnership, but also the PACS civil partnership.
To enter into acivil marriagein the Grand Duchy, the future spouses must be at least 18 years of age, and one of them must be officially resident in the Grand Duchy. It is nevertheless possible for minors to marry. In that case, an authorisation from the public prosecutor is necessary. Before being able to appear before the mayor or alderman of the municipality where you get married, you will need to allow at least 2 months (3 if one of the spouses is not a Luxembourg national) forcompleting the administrative formalities.
A civil marriage is legally valid,whereas a purely religious marriageis not. In fact, a religious marriage ceremony may only be held if the couple has already entered into a civil marriage.
Apart from civil marriage, thePACS civil partnershipis another option. A PACS civil partnership is a certification of partnership before the civil registrar of the municipality of residence, for people living as a couple. Like civil marriage, PACS is open to both hetero- and homosexual couples. A PACS grants the partners similar rights to those that married people are entitled to - with regard to social protection, or tax relief, for example.
PACS
The civil partnership (PACS) is a relatively recent institution in the Grand Duchy; it was introduced by the law of 9 July 2004. It provides legal security in civil, fiscal and social security matters for two people, of the same or different gender, who have decided to live together without getting married. It constitutes legal recognition of ways of living together other than marriage.
A partnership – or common-law union – is a domestic community of two people of the same or different gender, referred to as "partners". The partners must appear before the registrar of the municipality in which they live in order to declare their partnership personally and jointly.
Anyone, regardless of their nationality, may enter into a partnership in Luxembourg, provided that they are  legally resident here.
Customs
Customs depend very much on the couple's preferences. A whitewedding dressis still very popular, but there is no obligation - any colour is possible. The groom usually wears a dark suit, accessorised to harmonise with the colours worn by the bride.
If a couple decides to get married in church as well, the two ceremonies (civil and religious) often take place around the same time, sometimes even during the same week. In that case, it is usually for the religious ceremony that a big party is thrown.
Speaking of which: parties often involve adrink party (apéritif)bringing together friends, colleagues and the extended family, followed bya festive mealattended by the spouses and a close circle of family and friends, etc.). The highlights of the evening include the couple's first dance together, the tossing of the bride's bouquet, and the cutting of the cake by the newly weds.
As for gifts, most couples start a  wedding list at one or more shops to add to their household fittings or to finance the eagerly awaited honeymoon.
Divorce or separation?
Legally, divorcing people are married people, regardless of their matrimonial scheme. Luxembourg law allows a couple to divorce. As well as divorce, the law also provides for legal separation, which does not automatically end the marriage.
There are three types of divorce in the Grand Duchy:
Divorce or separation - information and practicalities
Last update11.11.2024
Guide pratique des démarches pour s'installer au Luxembourg
Santé et Sécurité sociale
Jours fériés légaux au Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/family/conges-parents.html
Types of parental leave
What are the leaves available to parents in the Grand Duchy? Under what circumstances and under what conditions are leaves granted? Here is an overview of the different types of leave and their terms and conditions.
Leave for the birth of a child
Maternity leave
There are a multitude of privacy circumstances under which leave can be taken. In the case of pregnancy, every pregnant woman who is in employment (employee, self-employed, apprentice) is entitled to prenatal maternity leave of 8 weeks before the presumed date of delivery and postnatal leave of 12 weeks after the date of delivery.
Consult the procedure "Applying for maternity leave" on Guichet.lu.
The Luxembourg Chamber of Employees provides detailed  information onmaternity leave.
Paternity leave
Every father (employee, apprentice, person in adult apprenticeship or self-employed) is entitled to 10 days paternity leave after the birth of a child. In the event of multiple births, the father is entitled to a full paternity leave for each child.
A person with an employment contract has to inform his employer in writing 2 months before the foreseeable dates on which he intends to take his leave. Once granted, future fathers are required to take advantage of these ten days of leave within two months after the birth of the child.
For more details of the procedure forpaternity leave, please consult Guichet.lu.
The Children's Futures Fund (CF) provides information on parental leave, allowances or childcare cheques.
Leave for the adoption of a child
Adoption leave
Employees are entitled to 12 weeks adoption leave when one or more children under the age of 12 are adopted. Adoption leave will enable one of the partners to stay at home in order to take care of the child(ren) who has/have recently arrived in the family.
For details of the procedure for "Applying for adoption leave", please consult Guichet.lu.
Special leave for personal reasons
A person who has to be absent from work for personal reasons (moving house, death of spouse/partner, marriage of a child, ...) is entitled to special leave with full income preservation. The duration of this type of leave varies according to the nature of the event, in particular in the case of the reception of a child under the age of 16 with a view to adoption (except in the case of benefiting from adoption leave).
For details of the procedure for "Applying for special leave for personal reasons", please consult Guichet.lu.
Parental leave
Parental leaveis not to be confused withpaternity leave.
Parental leave enables the parents of a young child to interrupt their careers or shorten their work hours in order to accompany the child at key moments in its development, while retaining the certainty of returning to their jobs at the end of the leave. Parental leave may be requested whether the child is legitimate, illegitimate, or legitimated. It may also be requested in case of an adoption procedure.
The reform of parental leave, introduced on 1 December 2016, accepts a flexibilisation of leave periods. Itallows parents to choose among flexible leave models adapted to their professional situations (full-time, part-time, split), while benefiting from a replacement income.
The first parental leave always has to be taken following maternity leave. The second parental leave, however, can now be taken up to 6 years of age of the child. It is now possible for both parents to take parental leave at the same time if they wish. If the parents had twins, then they're entitled to 2 times 6 months, that's 12 months.
All the detailed information is available on the websitewww.reforme-famille.public.lu(in French or German).
Find the practical guide  'Labor Law - Parental Leave 2017'  of the Chamber of Employeeshere.
For details of the procedure for "Applying for parental leave in case of birth or adoption of a child", please consult Guichet.lu.
Leave for family reasons in the event of a child's illness
Leave for family reasons enables the parents of a child under the age of 18 years to stay with the child in the event of serious illness, accident or other health-related problem with no loss of income. The duration of this kind of leave depends on the age of the child:
For details of the procedure for "Applying for leave for family reasons", please consult Guichet.lu.
The Luxembourg Chamber of Employees provides detailed information  onleave for family reasons.
Leave to accompany a dying person
Leave to accompany a dying person is a special type of paid leave which enables a worker (employed or self-employed) with a relative in the terminal stage of a serious illness to take leave of absence to be able to stay at their bedside. This leave is organised much in the same way as leave taken for family reasons.
For details of the procedure for "Applying for leave to accompany a dying person", please consult Guichet.lu.
The Luxembourg Chamber of Employees provides detailed information onleave to accompany a dying person.
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
News
Family allowances
Childcare
Equal opportunities
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/family/allowances-family-luxembourg.html
Family allowances
From parental leave to childcare vouchers for cross-border workers, the Children's Future Fund (Caisse pour l'avenir des enfants, CAE) is THE point of reference for financial aid for families in Luxembourg. The "Zukunftskeess" was created in 2016; the same year that the benefits system was reformed. In this report, you’ll find a summary of measures aimed at fostering a balanced family life and equal opportunities for all children!
Focus on children's future
The objective of the family allowance is to help parents to bring up their children bycovering the financial costs of their upkeep and education. More specifically, these benefits help to ensure that all children haveequal opportunities in the futureand that parents cantake advantage of a better work-life balance. Thewelfareof children and their parents, and the creation ofequal opportunitiesare the primary concerns of the State.
TheZukunftskeessis currently processing approximately 200,000 case files, covering family allowance, parental leave, childcare vouchers, etc. Applications must be made directly to the public body. The procedures can also be carried out online viaMyGuichet.lu, the electronic guide of the online services of the Luxembourg State, provided that you have one of theLuxTrustdevices required for a secure connection.
The different types of allowances are:
Did you know?
As across-border worker, you are also eligible to claim most of the benefits. These include family allowance, age of majority, back-to-school allowance, birth grants and the special supplementary allowance for biological and adopted children.
Quality care for every child
The "Staark Kanner"(strong children) initiative of the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth brings together a series of measures toensure access to quality non-formal education. The State's contribution to the cost of childcare and supervision, through thechildcare service voucher, is one such measure. It is aimed at allchildren aged between 0 and 12 who live in Luxembourg. Children aged 1 to 4 who are not in school and who attend an education and childcare service (nursery) or mini-nursery that accepts childcare service vouchers are entitled to 20 hours of free childcare per week, 46 weeks per year. More information is available on theMinistrywebsite.
Application for membershipof the CSA scheme can be made at themunicipality of residence.
Did you know?
Since 2016,non-resident workersare also eligible to apply for childcare service vouchers. They must be affiliated to the Joint Social Security Centre (Centre Commun de la sécurité sociale, CCSS) or work for a European institution. Moreover, they must receive the family allowance for the child for whom they are seeking the CSA. All the details are availablehere.
Last update15.01.2026
For more information
Childcare
Types of parental leave
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/family/equal-opportunities.html
Equal opportunities
Luxembourg is devoted to creating a society with no gender stereotypes, advocating for gender equality in all areas of life. It is firmly committed to the fight against domestic violence and gender-based stereotypes and has passed a law on the principle of wage equality.
A Ministry dedicated to gender equality
Since 1995, Luxembourg has had a ministry dedicated to gender equality, now known as theMinistry for Gender Equality and Diversity. Luxembourg is theonly EU state with a ministry whose  responsibility is exclusively gender equality. Its missions and initiatives focus  mainly on legal and factual equality between women and men.
One of its main tasks is toimplement gender mainstreaming in the Grand Duchy's political structures. The fight against gender stereotypes in all domains is part of that policy.
Equality in the workplace
TheLaw of 15 December 2016incorporatedthe principle of equal salaries in the Grand Duchy's legislation. Since that date, it is illegal for there to be any difference in the salaries paid to men and women carrying out the same task or work of equal value.
Private sector companies as well as administrations and public sector institutions may take part in theMinistry's programme of positive actions on a voluntary basis. As part of the programme, an independent survey analyses the degree of equality between men and women within the participating body. A plan is then drawn up jointly with a view to improving the initial situation.
Strong action to combat domestic violence
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has had legislation tocombat domestic violence since 2006. In addition to providing for the expulsion from the family home for up to 14 days for perpetrators of domestic violence, this legislation also provides for taking care of and subsequently monitoring both victims and perpetrators of domestic violence.
Last update24.03.2026
For more information
Work life balance: a balanced concept for a well-balanced life
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Equal opportunities
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/societe-culture-fetes-traditions-unesco-ecoles.html
Mondorf, first Luxembourg school in the Unesco network
International Day of Education is celebrated every year on 24 January.  This day, a United Nations initiative, highlights the importance of education as a fundamental right.  In Luxembourg, the Unesco Associated Schools are celebrating their 25th anniversary.
;The Mondorf-les-Bains primary schoolwhich proudly bears the name of Grand Duchess Maria Teresa, was the first Luxembourg school to join the Unesco network in 1999. It was a moment worthy of celebration, so much that the Grand Duchess, a Unesco Goodwill Ambassador known for her commitment to the development of education, made a point of visiting the spa town in person to celebratethe 25th anniversary of the first school joining the United Nations network.
During the celebrations, which took place last November at the Biergerhaus in Mondorf, pupils from Luxembourg's Unesco schools enlivened the academic session with performances and presentations illustrating their schools' commitment to Unesco's values.
In the Grand Duchy,the Unesco Associated Schools Network currently comprises 16 schools, including four basic schools, 11 secondary schools and one international public school. They help to promote Unesco values such as the preservation of cultural heritage, sustainable development, peace and respect for human rights.
3 questions to Paul Sandt, a teacher at Mondorf-les-Bains for 35 years and now President of the school. 25 years ago, he took the initiative of creating the first Unesco school in Luxembourg.
1.  The Mondorf-les-Bains primary school was the first to join the Unesco network. What prompted this move, and how important is it for your school to be part of the worldwide network of Unesco schools?
When I was a child, I sometimes accompanied my parents to cultural events or on holiday. These activities were rarely, if ever, suitable for children. I remember in Venice, the tour guide literally bombarded visitors with numbers they didn't know what to do with.
Geography was and remains my favourite subject at primary school and it was through this subject that I tried to pass on culture in a way that was appropriate for children in Cycle 4 (at the time: the top grade). When our capital became a Unesco World Heritage Site in December 1994, I started developing walking rallies around this world heritage site in 1995.
At the request of the Luxembourg Unesco Commission (Jean-Pierre Kraemer), I was asked whether - in order to promote this innovative form of walking rally for children - the Mondorf school would like to become the 1st Unesco school in the Grand Duchy.
2.  Are there any collaborations with other schools in the network, in Luxembourg and internationally? If so, can you give us some concrete examples of activities or projects carried out?
In 1999, the moment finally came: Mondorf officially became the first Unesco Associated School in Luxembourg. During the first few years in particular, exchanges took place with other Unesco schools: classes or individual students from Germany (Oberwesel) and Austria (Bad Goisern-Hallstatt) tried out the walking rally. Mondorf pupils then travelled to Oberwesel, where they discovered a similar form of rally.
As part of a Comenius project, two teachers visited the Unesco school in Bad Goisern. Over time, another walking rallywas created, this time in Trier and for pupils in higher grades (particularly those in cycle 4.1) on the theme of the Romans.
For 25 years now, Mondorf school has been organising visits to various Unesco World Heritage sites as part of its school camps: more than 30 different places have already been visited.
3.  How are Unesco values such as peace, equality and sustainability integrated into the school's curriculum?
While the origins of the project clearly lie in Unesco's ‘World Heritage’ pillar, the values mentioned here are increasingly being thematised in our school.
As part of our School Development Plan (SDP), a Unesco working group was set up to examine the various pillars of the SDP.
Here are a few actions that correspond to these pillars: the Cool Down Project (peace and equality pillar) as part of SDP 1, Too Cool for School (a musical that corresponds to each pillar), recycling in all classes and energy saving (sustainability pillar) and offering fair trade and organic products.
The network's (ASPnet) key themes
Founded in 1953,theUnesco Associated Schools Project Network (ASPnet)brings together some 10,000 public and private schoolsin 181 countries. To join the ASPnet, applicant schools must present a project aligned with the educational priorities defined by the network. The projects focus on the following themes:
The project may involve a class or a group of pupils, and the school undertakes to share it with the whole school community, for example through an exhibition.
Network members regularly exchange information on their respective projectsor collaborate on joint initiatives involving several schools. Examples include collective participation in the Bildung fir nohalteg Entwécklung (BNE) fair and the Echternach dance procession.
25th anniversary of the UNESCO Associated Schools Network - LCD film (Video/Audio YouTube)
International Day of Education
International Education Day, whichis celebrated every year on 24 January, was proclaimed by the United Nations General Assembly in 2018. This day aims to recognise the fundamental role of education in building inclusive, sustainable and prosperous societies.
Last update27.01.2025
For more information
The intangible cultural heritage in the spotlight: discover seven traditional treasures of Luxembourg
The Haupeschbléiser: The UNESCO-recognised hunting horn players of Luxembourg
Easter traditions in Luxembourg: of egg hunts, Éimaischen and other customs
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/scouting-luxembourg-education-traditions.html
Scouting in Luxembourg
Solidarity, tolerance and democracy are just some of the scouting values. Through these values, Scouting contributes to the education of children and young people. Together, the group plays a constructive role in our society and is committed to creating a better world. We introduce you to the FNEL, its missions and how the Scouts continue the traditions, symbols and ceremonies that form the common thread running through their activities.
The largest international network for children and young people
Worldwide,Scouts and Guides have over 50 million members in 216 different countries and territories. It is the largest international network for children and young people aged between 6 and 26.
The first groups of theFNEL(Fédération nationale des éclaireurs et éclaireuses du Luxembourg) have existed since 1914, and the federation itself since 1916. It is a founder member of today'sWOSM(World Organisation of the Scout Movement). However, the FNEL is not the only scout federation in Luxembourg. Its counterpart is theLëtzebuerger Guiden a Scouten, whose origins are Catholic. Together they represent Scouting in Luxembourg and therefore Luxembourg scouting, with HRH the Grand Duke Guillaume as Luxembourg's "Chief Scout".
Values that do good
The FNELrespects the individualityof each scout and guide. Itpromotes mutual aid and listening to others. It is involved in national and international aid programmes. Independent, the federationdefends the fundamental values of democracywithout being linked to any political ideology or party. Scouts and Guides are receptive to new ideas and critical of socio-political issues. Inhumane ideologies are denounced.
The FNEL is a secular movement: everyone is free to choose their religious and philosophical beliefs. Living together means being tolerant of others and open to new cultures. Everyone has the right and the duty to express themselves - that's the federation's democratic way.
A good Scout keeps his promises and respects the rules
The ideas of Lord Robert Baden-Powell, the godfather of scouting, are the "ingredients" of the "Scout recipe". Play and fun are the spice of the soup.
In the world of scouts, you discover, learn and develop continuously and independently in a fun programme adapted to your age.
Girl and Boy Scouts discover and learn:
Scouts and Guides promise to respect the principles and methods and to abide by theScout Law.
Advent wreath
Traditions are passed down from generation to generation. They create bonds. Scouting also uses symbols and ceremonies that are the common thread running through its activities.
Every year the groupLes Panthères Noiresfrom Lorentzweiler devotes itself to a Christmas tradition:the Advent wreath.
Its origins date back to 19th century Hamburg, to a Protestant foundation that looked after children. In the run-up to Christmas, the children kept asking their theologian when it would finally be time.To anticipate this question and make the wait easier for the children, he put together a sort of Christmas calendar with a wagon wheel and as many candlesas there were days between the first Sunday in Advent and Christmas Eve.
It wasn't until the 1860s that the wreath was also decorated with fir branches, and it became generally popular.The green of the fir tree in winter is a symbol of hope: in the midst of ice and snow, cold and darkness, new life is being prepared.Added to this is the light, which gains in strength from Sunday to Sunday in the earlywinter darkness.
List of materials for the wreath:
Material list for the decoration:
There are no limits to your imagination when it comes to decorating: here, everyone can use whatever they find beautiful, from pinecones to sparkling bows.
Instructions for use:
Advent wreath
The Panthères noires group making Advent wreaths.
© Les Panthères Noires
Christmas baubles
© Les Panthères Noires
Advent wreath craft.
© Les Panthères Noires
Advent wreath
© Les Panthères Noires
Advent wreaths made by the Panthères noires group.
© Les Panthères Noires
A non-religious Advent wreath
In the Middle Ages, servants could take advantage of an unwritten law according to which they did not have to work outside when it was too cold. To symbolise this rule, the wagon they usually used to go out to the fields was stored in the barn. One of the wheels was unscrewed and hung from the ridge of the roof or inside the house.
As the wheel is also a symbol of the sun, it was decorated with evergreen branches - a symbol of the hope of seeing the sun again in spring.
Last update08.01.2026
For more information
Christmas - a time of togetherness
The Christmas log
Volunteering
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/bee-secure-youth-internet-security.html
BEE SECURE: Supporting young people and helping parents with digital education
Have you ever felt uncomfortable online due to unwanted messages or questionable content? Such experiences are increasingly common and illustrate the importance of online security. For over ten years, BEE SECURE has been committed to promoting a positive digital culture and raising young people’s awareness of the risks associated with internet use by means of a diverse programme.
An initiative for the future
Technology is constantly evolving and digital trends are an integral part of our everyday lives.Young people in particular are increasingly active on the internet and social media. These media may seem really easy to use, but cybersecurity still has to be learned. This is where BEE SECURE comes in. What are the risks and how do I deal with them? How should I behave on the internet? Where can I find help? Its goal:to shape a responsible generation of internet users and promote a positive digital culture.
To achieve this, BEE SECURE offers a comprehensive range of services:
BEE SECURE offers free training sessions in up to four languagesin schools, youth centres, after-school centres and other locations. Children and teenagers from primary school age to their final year of secondary school can take advantage of this offering. There is also a selection of courses for adultsto help them better accompany young people on their digital journey. The courses are as diverse as the internet landscape itself.
For example, there is anintroductionto the digital world for the littlest ones. That way, they can alreadylearn about the risks and how to behave online while at primary school.
Older pupils look into more complex topics such asdata protectionormisinformation on the internet. As such, they gain an insight into the everyday use of data andlearn to critically question information.
BEE SECURE Activities
Free academic training is offered from the third year of primary school until the completion of secondary school.
© BEE SECURE
Twice a year, children and teenagers playfully acquire skills in handling technology at the DigiRallye.
© BEE SECURE
The Movietalk covers thematic films and stimulates interactive discussions.
© BEE SECURE
BEE SECURE offers a range of informational events, whether on a large or small scale.
© Marc Lazzarini
Training sessions are also available for seniors.
© BEE SECURE
BEE SECURE can be found at various events.
© BEE SECURE
What’s more, BEE SECURE organises larger digital security events.
TheSafer Internet Day(SID) is celebrated in Luxembourg each year. During this event,current online problems are discussed and various activities are organised for all ages, under the slogan "Together for a better Internet". This year's edition featured theMovietalkwas part of SID.
Additionally, theDigiRallyetakes place twice a year. With its partners, BEE SECURE also offersworkshops and activities to teach childrenhow to use media responsibly in a fun way.
In addition to the larger events, BEE SECURE also offerssmaller informative events, such asparents' evenings.
BEE SECURE Helpline & Stopline
BEE SECURE offers acounselling service and a reporting platform.
The campaigns complement BEE SECURE’s wide range of services.
At the beginning of each school year, BEE SECURE launches a national campaignto raise public awareness on a current topic. Their 2023/24 campaignKeep your spacesafe will focus on cybersecurity education. BEE SECURE provides tips and life hacks to help protect devices and data from internet risks.
A government initiative for young people
BEE SECURE, launched by the government, has a clear objective: to make the public,particularly young people and those around them, receptive to the responsible use of digital technology. The National Youth Service (Service national de la jeunesse) and the KJT counselling service work together behind the scenes, but they are by no means alone.A whole range ofnational institutionsare behind the initiative, and BEE SECURE has excellent connections at international level.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Secondary education
Higher education institutions
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/education-quality-equality-opportunities-accessibility.html
Quality education for all
Ensuring the right to education and equal opportunities is a comprehensive school support programme in Luxembourg. The main priority of the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth is to provide a wide range of options and equal educational opportunities for all children and young people in the Grand Duchy. In this article, we will present three of the many ongoing projects: the inclusion of pupils with special needs, diversification in types of schooling and financial support for families.
Personalised support
For parents who wish to take advantage of the option, and where feasible, the Luxembourg government guarantees schooling tochildren and young people with special educational needsin the"regular" education system, as well as care in childcare facilities and the chance to take part in youth activities. A child or young person with special educational needs (SEN) has more difficulty learning than the majority of pupils of the same age and may have particular impairments or difficulties. As such, the child’s care cannot be provided by the means normally available to the teacher or educator who takes care of the child in question. These needs may include motor, visual, language or hearing, cognitive or behavioural development.
Inprimary school education,different types of supportare made available and adapted accordingly:
If you are the parent of a child with special needs and you have specific questions, do not hesitate toask the class teacher or the teaching staffwho will be able to advise you and refer you to specialised professionals.
Insecondary schoola student with special needs may receive support from,
Thefirst point of contact is the teacher and the class teacher.Specialised services and teams are available to implement appropriate follow-up procedures in consultation with the student and his/her parents.
In addition to these measures, children and young people can sign up to aspecial learning workshop within the school or in a special education classat aCompetence Centreoran institution outside Luxembourg.
The eight Competence Centres in Special Educational Psychology, the National Inclusion Commission (CNI), the Special Needs Support Teams (ESEB), the teachers specialised in the supervision and care of these pupils, the Regional Inclusion Commissions and the School Inclusion Commissions of the secondary schools are currently helping to integrate children and young people as well as ensuring their well-being. For more information on thenew programmes, support and future assistance, seehere!
Quick fact
For pupils, the rate of attendance in specialised centres isless than 1%in Luxembourg, showing that inclusion efforts are very successful.
Offering a broader, more diverse and flexible schooling
The school population in Luxembourg is ascosmopolitanas its population. Over 60% of pupils do not have Luxembourgish as their mother tongue and each year more than 2,000 youngsters enter the school system for the first time. In order togive every child and young person a chance to succeed, the government is focusing ondiversifying the type of schoolingavailable by adapting the education programme to different profiles.
Luxembourg is atrilingual country: the national language is Luxembourgish and the legislative language is French, while French, German and Luxembourgish are the three administrative and judicial languages.The education system also uses allthree languages.This isan advantagefor youngsters, but alsoa challengefor students fromdiverse linguistic backgrounds.The school policyfosters diversification in education in order toprovide greater flexibility in language learning for all students:
Several international state schools – operating according to European school curricula, academic criteria and timetables – give students the opportunity to choose a flexible language pathway, by offering teaching in their main language or mother tongue. These schools are open and free to all.
Several state schools also offer an International Baccalaureate (IB) in French or English. TheInternational School Michel Luciusteaches the British curriculum accredited by the University of Cambridge for primary and secondary education and theGerman-Luxembourg High Schoolin Schengen combines the school curriculum of Luxembourg and Germany.
Regardless of background, an individual’s mother tongue, socio-economic status or merely the desire to evaluate in an international environment, multicultural and multilingual public education presents opportunities for everyone. In September 2022, the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth launched a pilotFrench literacy projectin four primary schools across the country. Pupils learn to read and write more easily in a language whose structure they have already mastered or which is closer to their mother tongue. The programme is based on the experience gathered in state international schools that follow the European school curriculum.
Immigration is a key factor in Luxembourg. In fact, almost half the population does not have Luxembourg nationality. Schooling is compulsory from the age of 4 to 18, andall children must be enrolled in school, regardless of their parents' residential status.Newly arrived children in Luxembourg, between the ages of 6 and 11, are enrolled into a regular class according to their academic record, their educational background, their age and the results of evaluation tests in mathematics and their mother tongue.They may also attend a state international school.Parents ofchildren aged 3 to 11 andmust contact theirmunicipality of residenceto register.Teenagersaged 12 or over must make an appointment at the Department for the Schooling of Foreign Children (SECAM). SECAM gives information about school systems, support, school enrolment and where necessaryintercultural mediation. It assesses the young people's language skills and educational achievements and guides them towards the appropriate class or training. The same applies toyoung adultsaged 18 to 24:adapted training to learn at least two official languages or prepare for integration into regular classes.Occupational training is also available.
Easy access to quality support
Regardless of their socio-economic status, Luxembourg aims to provide easy access to quality education and care for all children. In this regard, the Grand Duchy contributes to fostering equal opportunities for all through aseries of free and discounted measuresfor parents.
Through the childcare service voucher system, the State contributes financially to child care in educational and care facilities, mini-nurseries and parental assistants. The State contribution is based on the specific situation of each family.
Regardless of their parents' income, all children aged 1 to 4 (not yet enrolled in school) can benefit from 20 hours of free childcare spread over 46 weeks per year in any educational or childcare facility that is a CSA service provider.
Children enrolled in primary education are accommodated free of charge during school periods in non-formal education facilities. Lunch is also provided.
Thesemeasuresguarantee access to the multilingual education programme from an early age and the development of social skills essential for academic development.
Did you know?
Since January 2023, some 8,010 pupils have benefited from free lunch in the canteen. These are children from low- and modest-income families. They also receive financial support from the Psychosocial and School Support Centre (CePAS): thelow-income household subsidy.
From the 2022-2023 school year, the childcare centre (maison relais), day-care centre (foyer scolaire) or parental assistants organise a qualityhelp-with-homework schemefor children in cycles 2 to 4 of primary school in order to support and promote social justice by relieving families and reducing the pressure and stress at home.
At the end of the summer school holidays, state schools offer free optional catch-up classes viaSummerschool.lu. Students and parents can also find the relevant information here. Access is free and everyone can take advantage of this initiative. The new programme is available from 15 July!
Quick fact
School books are freefor all schoolchildren in Luxembourg. Students in secondary education and occupational training can just register viamybooks.lu.
Music educationnurtures personal growth and development. A student can increase their level of concentration, broaden their creativity, stimulate their curiosity and strengthen their self-esteem. In order to ensure that as many young people as possible can take advantage of this initiative, a large proportion of the music, vocal arts and dance courses in themusic schools in the municipal sectorhave been free since the start of the 2022-2023 school year. This free tuition is supplemented by additional financial subsidies from the State and is valid for initial musical education (from the age of 4) until the first level of the diploma.
Claude Meisch, Minister of Education, Children and Youth
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Schooling for foreign children
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
Education in the 21st century (I)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/education-21-century-luxembourg-magrid.html
Education in the 21st century (I)
The objective of the national research and innovation strategy is to make Luxembourg a country where sustainable, diverse and digital knowledge can thrive. Education plays a key role in this objective. In a cosmopolitan country, it is therefore logical that the education system allows students to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. This is a challenge that researcher Tahere Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes are eager to embrace! In a first article, we shine a light on the Magrid programme with its creator Tahereh Pazouki. In a second article, we discuss the French literacy pilot project - launched in September 2022 - with Sarah Scholtes.
Learn and be prepared for the world of tomorrow
The rapid pace of technological progress has become part of our daily lives. Therefore, in Luxembourg, digital technologies are not only part of the educational programme, they are also used as tools to develop knowledge about this type of content. Among other benefits, they help to address the challenge of multilingualism in schools. Research in Luxembourg aims to study and develop programmes and opportunities to ensure equal opportunities for all students, irrespective of their socio-economic background, in an open and diverse world.
MAGRID: an inclusive educational programme
Five countries, 400 schools, 1,300 teachers and 12,000 students,Magridis known across the world and has been awarded numerous prizes. This100% visual educational programmeimproves thedevelopment of mathematical, visual-spatial and cognitive skills of young children aged 3 to 9 years old, and in turn their performance at school. It also helps teachers and parents toincrease the pace of teaching and to facilitate learning. Tahereh Pazouki created the Magrid Learning Solution in the incubator at theUniversity of Luxembourgduring her PhD. It started as a spin-off, now it's a start-up!
Please could you briefly introduce yourself.
I am 31 years old and I come from Iran but I'm also Luxembourgish at heart. I arrived inLuxembourg in 2012to finish mystudies in computer sciencesat the University of Luxembourg. Afterwards, I went on to study for myPhD in psychology. The Magrid programme is the culmination of my research work. It is a learning solution that provides equal opportunities for all children in the world. In September 2020, I created a start-up.
What brought you to Luxembourg?
I was looking forEuropean universitieswhich offeredgood courses in computer sciences. Theprofile of the professorsin Luxembourg wasspecialand the enrolment costs were affordable. Two of myfriendsalso wanted to study in Europe and we wanted tostay together. All three of us were accepted at the University of Luxembourg. It was a great opportunity and a fantastic experience.
When did you get the idea for the Magrid programme?
It all began with my studies in computer science and my interest in psychology. When I discussed my idea of undertaking a PhD in psychology, the heads of the department presented me withvarious projects that the University of Luxembourg was working on. The field that particularly caught my attention was the one that sought toexplain the differences in the performance of students in Luxembourg and how to address these divergences. One explanation wasthe multilingualismin the education system and in society. The ambition of my doctoral thesis was thereforeto discover a solution to overcome this language barrier in the teaching of mathematics in early and primary education. Moreover, it was also thefirst ever interdisciplinary cooperation(between the Department of Computer Science and the Department of Psychology) thus offering considerable potential for fostering programme development and future projects.
What is the meaning of "Magrid"?
The name refers to the daisy flower, which is calledMagréitchenin Luxembourgish. It also has a poetic connotation: we areplanting the seed in order to nurture the mathematical skills of children. The petals of the growing flowers also refer to the different elements of the mathematical concept. Together, all these petals allow the flower to bloom.
Who supported you during the development process?
Besides the psychology and computer science departments at the University of Luxembourg, I mainly received support fromSCRIPT(Service de Coordination de la Recherche et de l'Innovation pédagogiques et technologiques) and theMinistry of Education, Children and Youthwho helped me duringthe test phase of the programmeby testing the programme in various schools with different groups of children, training the educators and teachers, collecting the results, carrying out the assessments, etc. TheLuxembourg National Research Fundalso supported the project.
How have the first users reacted to the programme? Could you perhaps share a particularly interesting anecdote with us?
When the testing phase was completed,the teachers asked for me to keep the material and to use the results of the training.It was at this point that I realised that Magrid was more than a research project. It needed to bedeveloped into a programmeand perhaps a company, at a later date. Subsequently, the Ministry of Education purchasedlicencesfor the application andin March 2021 Magrid was launched in all public schools in Luxembourg. At present, 12,000 children have used the programme.
After the publication of the scientific results, the feedback was also very positive. I startedto receive requests from various countries around the world, such as South Africa, the United States, Brazil and Turkey. We then started to expand beyond the Grand Duchy and took Magrid across the globe.
What is unique about Magrid is that it can be used byall children, including those who havespecial educational needs(hearing difficulties, language problems, etc.) In Portugal, for example, the programme is used to develop the cognitive skills of children with Down's syndrome.
Magrid is a reliable training programme with a clear pathway in terms of tasks and development.
What is your impression of the scientific ecosystem in Luxembourg?
For the creation of the start-up, I was able to count on the support ofLuxinnovation, theChamber of Commerceand theMinistry of the Economy. My partner for this project is based in the US and he is impressed that such a small country can provide such a significant level of support.
From a personal perspective, what do you like most about Luxembourg?
The country has a strong commitment to excellence and this concept is flourishing. The pace of development is very high and everything is constantly being improved. Luxembourg is a welcoming and open society. I now consider this country as my homeland.
Do you have any other projects in the pipeline for the future? Will you continue your research in the field of early childhood education?
I intend to stay in Luxembourg and continue to work in the fields of education and equal opportunities, and it is my intention to try to provide high-quality learning methods. We are also expanding our scope. In the future, Magrid will be available for other age groups, with programmes specifically designed for different levels of learning difficulties and adapted to a wider geographical area.
Did you know?
The Ministry of Education, Children and Youth, together with other partners, has also developed thepersonalised learning platform MathemaTIC, allowing pupils inprimary and secondary schoolsto learn mathematics while having fun! For more information about the programme and itsinteractive mathematical modules, clickhere.
Last update27.02.2026
For more information
Education in the 21st century (II)
Languages at school
Studying in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/education-21-century-luxembourg-literacy-french.html
Education in the 21st century (II)
The objective of the national research and innovation strategy is to make Luxembourg a country where sustainable, diverse and digital knowledge can thrive. Education plays a key role in this objective. In a cosmopolitan country, it is therefore logical that the education system allows students to grow and learn in an open, diverse and multilingual environment. This is a challenge that researcher Tahereh Pazouki and teacher Sarah Scholtes are eager to embrace! In a first article, we shine a light on the Magrid programme with its creator Tahereh Pazouki. In a second article, we discuss the French literacy pilot project - launched in September 2022 - with Sarah Scholtes.
Literacy in French: growing together
In the Grand Duchy,Luxembourgish, German and Frenchare taught in traditional primary education. Thismultilingual systemis both anadvantageand achallenge. In order to providemore equal opportunities for all students with extremely diverse linguistic backgrounds, the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth launched apilot literacy project in Frenchin September 2022 in four primary schools across the country. Theprogrammeis based, more specifically, on the experience gathered in state international schools that follow the European school curriculum. Sarah Scholtes, a teacher in level 2.1 at the Schifflange school, is actively working on this project directly in the field.
Please could you introduce yourself to our readers.
My name is Sarah Scholtes. I have been ateachersince 2007 and taught most of my career in level 2. This year marks a first for me, I ama teacher of a level 2.1 class that is literate in French.
Luxembourg is a multicultural society and many languages are spoken on a daily basis in the Grand Duchy. Does multilingualism play an important role in education?
In Luxembourg,multilingualism plays a significant roleand the school system must take this linguistic diversity in account. In level 1,the emphasis is initially placed on Luxembourgish, before focusing on German and French in subsequent levels. By this stage,all pupils are literate in German.Moreover, German has also been used as the language of communication in most lessons. However,this has now changedfor the pupils enrolled in the pilot class. TheFrench literacyproject focuses onlearning to read and write in a language that is more familiar to some pupilsthan German. It is easier for children learn to read and write in a language whose structure they have already mastered or which is closer to a language they already know. Previously, Luxembourgish was considered as a gateway to German. Today, this is no longer the case. Literacy in French is central tomaking the Luxembourg education system more equitablefor the large number of children living in Grand Duchy with an immigrant background and a Latin-based mother tongue. Moreover, parents, irrespective of their country of origin, often opt for French as the language of integration. The use of Frenchfurther nurtures the link between the school and the homeandallows parents to be more actively involved in children's school activities.However, I am not claiming that German should be neglected. The main aim of this pilot project is toensure a positive beginning in language learning.
For years you have been teaching children to read and write in German. However, this year things are different. You are teaching in French! What is your initial impression after a few weeks of lessons?
My first impressions are extremely positive. In contrast to the German-speaking curricula, with which I have worked in recent years,the French-speaking approach is more ritual-based.Vocabulary is developed through songs, poems and stories that are repeated and then recited by heart by the children after a few days. Overall, I get the impression that I speak much more in French now than I did in German beforehand. Moreover, I no longer need to translate as much for the children. Speaking French in everyday life as well as during extracurricular activities, coupled with the Trampoline programme (an analytical approach to learning), further simplifies the early stages of literacy. At the start of the school year we systematically practisedphonological-awareness exerciseson a daily basis. Currently, we are working on thegrapheme-phoneme correspondenceand thefusion of several graphemes. With the help of literary texts,reading comprehensionis developed little by little.
What sort of feedback are you getting from the children?
The children adore the different rituals. If I forget one ritual, they immediately remind me.
Do you speak French in every lesson or do you still use other languages?
For pupils who are literate in French,the roles of French and German have been reversedcompared to the pupils who are literate in German: French is the main written and spoken language - "Language 1" - and German - "Language 2" - is learned orally. We speak French in French lessons (9 hours) and Maths lessons (6 hours). German is taught for one hour per week. All the other subjects are taught in Luxembourgish. For us, it was important thatLuxembourgish remained the common language of communicationand the language of integrationfor all. As we have a mixed group of children from two different classes in level 2.1, in the secondary subjects the pupils write the classwork in the language in which they are literate. This approach reflectsthe open-minded approach to languages,outlined in the study plan.
How can you introduce children to a language in a fun and entertaining way?
Learning a language is fun whenthe teaching is variedandthe children are actively involved. Hence, the phases of discovering sounds with all the senses are longer than those when we write in school books. Pupils come to level 2.1 in order to learn to read and write, and to stay motivated. Therefore, it is essential that they quickly achieve their goals. They need tosee that their efforts are worthwhile. In this regard, books are just as useful as digital media. Literacy in French does not change the academic pathway to secondary education later on.
Whenthe time comes for children to go to secondary school, they must have thenecessary skills in both languages- French and German - in order to access secondary education (classic, general or international). French literacy is therefore an additional tool which can be used to better cultivate the needs of the pupils.It is up to the parents to choose in which language a child will learn to read and write.
Editor's note:
The interview took place in 2022. In December 2025, the law introducing the choice between German and French as the language of literacy in public primary schools was passed. Thus, in the second trimester of the 2026/2027 school year, parents of pupils in cycle 1.2 will be able to choose German or French as their child's literacy language for the first time. At the start of the 2027/2028 school year, pupils in cycle 2.1 will be taught literacy in the chosen language. The ALPHA –zesumme wuessenreform will then be gradually extended to all cycles until the start of the 2032/2033 school year.
Last update27.02.2026
For more information
Education in the 21st century (I)
Languages at school
Studying in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/studying-music-luxembourg.html
Music education in Luxembourg: opportunities at all ages
In Luxembourg, children can begin their music education from the age of four. Lessons are taught at municipal music schools and conservatoires, outside the compulsory school system. Several municipalities also offer lessons for adults. The University of Luxembourg provides training for future teachers. Since the start of the 2022-23 academic year, most music, dance and performing arts lessons have been taught free of charge at municipal music schools. Here is an overview of how musical education is organised in Luxembourg.
Stages in music education
Introduction to music
As soon as they turn four,children can come and discover the joy of music through singing, movement and games. The aim of this music awareness course is to introduce children to the pleasure of expressing themselves through music. They learn to sing, move and dance to music, and are taught how to listen to music and recognise different instruments in a fun way. The introductory course is also a first step on the way to learning an instrument. It helps children develop intellectual and social skills, dexterity, and the ability to work in a group.
This first stage, which lasts up to two years, is taught in regional and local conservatoires and music schools, which are organised by municipalities under the aegis of theMinistry of Education, Children and Youth.
Lower tier
After the introductory music awareness course, children begin a basic music theory course, alongside instrumental or singing lessons.This four-year music theory course is compulsory for those wishing to learn an instrument or take singing lessons.
The skills covered in the basic music theory course include singing, sight-reading, time signatures, rhythms and beats, improvisation, listening and musical notation.
Intermediate tier and specialist intermediate tier
Lessons for students in the intermediate and specialist intermediate tiers are taught at regional music schools or conservatoires. The country's three conservatoires have been given a national mandate to teach the specialist intermediate tier.
Higher tier
Higher tier lessons are only taught at the country's conservatoires.The national mandate given to conservatoires also extends to the higher tier.
Clickherefor a list of all the country's music schools and conservatoires.
Bachelor in Music Education
TheUniversity of Luxembourg, in partnership with Luxembourg's three conservatoires, offers a degree course for students who love music andare interested in becoming music teachers: theBachelor in Music Education.
During the course, students learn about different teaching methods, complete internships each semester and attend a university abroad. A personal academic tutor supports each student throughout the course.
Did you know?
Since the start of the 2022-23 academic year, most music, dance and performing arts classes have been taught free of charge by the country's municipalities for children up to the age of 18. And for adults or more advanced students, tuition costs are capped at €100 per subject each year. Low-income families are even eligible for a full or partial refund.
Courses for adults
Music theory, instrumental and singing lessons for adults, as well as elocution and jazz dance lessons, are open to all adults with the aim of developing their interest, pleasure and enthusiasm for music, performing arts and dance.
Courses for adults are taught at the three types of music school in Luxembourg: local music schools, regional music schools and conservatoires.
Last update06.11.2025
For more information
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Secondary education
Rock, Pop, et cetera - popular music genres
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/free-childcare-service-vouchers-luxembourg.html
Childcare Service Vouchers
If you work and have one or more dependent children, childcare is a challenge. Luxembourg understands the expenses facing parents who wish to combine the pursuit of a professional career with the education of their children, especially when the children are still young. Luxembourg has also understood that offering all children equal opportunities from an early age means providing them with access to the same chances for success, whatever their social background.
That's why the Luxembourg government provides all residents and all non-resident employees with an allowance so that their children can be looked after in childcare facilities. This takes the form of childcare service vouchers, known aschèques- service accueil(CSA), available for all children between the ages of 0 and 12. These vouchers can be used as payment in kind for childcare services, as well as for a number of extra-curricular activities.
Quality and affordable childcare for all
The childcare service voucher (CSA) system is aimedat all children of parents living in Luxembourg and also at the children of cross-border workers, as long as they are from an EU Member State and at least one parent works in Luxembourg.The idea is to make it easierfor parents to achieve a better work-life balance, and to ensure high-quality care for all childrenin approved facilities that are subject to quality controls.
Through the CSA system,the government pays part of the cost of childcarein nurseries, childcare centres (maisons relais), day-care centres or with parental assistants,provided the facility is approved as a service provider by the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth. With themultilingual educationprogramme, children aged 1 to 4 who are not yet in school and attend an education and childcare facility or a mini-crèche are entitled to20 hours of free childcare for 46 weeks a year. The programme is a way for children to be given anintroduction to the Luxembourgish and French languages.
During term time, children between the ages of 4 and 12, who are required to attend school, are entitled to free childcare from Monday to Friday, 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., and five main meals.For those who require childcare and main meals outside these hours, unless the education and childcare facility charges for the additional hours, the parental participation scale used for the childcare service voucher (CSA) scheme is applied to calculate parents' contribution.
A fair scale for payment
To calculate the contribution made by parents to costs, the Luxembourg government has introduceda scale based on criteria including income and the number of hours of education and childcare required by parents. This means that parents on a low income are entitled to more hours of childcare at a cheaper rate than parents with higher salaries.
How do I register?
Do you meet the conditions? To benefit from the CSA scheme, you simply need toask to register at your local municipality if you live in Luxembourg or contact the Children's Future Fund (Caisse pour l'avenir des enfants- CAE) if you work in Luxembourg but live in another country.
After registering for the CSA scheme, you can access yoursecure personal space via theeduguichet.lu websiteusing a LuxTrust product.
Last update13.08.2024
For more information
Family allowances
Childcare
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/fundamental-education.html
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Basic education in Luxembourg covers the first 9 years of schooling (3 to 11 years) divided into 4 learning cycles. Schooling is compulsory from the age of 4. In Luxembourg, the pedagogical approach is centred on individual competences, assessment in pedagogical units and teamwork.
A diverse and welcoming public school offer
There are156 public fundamental schoolsin Luxembourg. Basic schools are organised by the municipalities and the state. School management is set up in fifteen regions according to a distribution based on the number of pupils, teachers and schools. As aresult of our society's diversity, the school population is alsomultilingual and multicultural.
Three public fundamental schools (Eis Schoul;Jean-JaurèsandVilla Mirabella) offer alternative teaching methods. We also have fourpublic international schoolsoperating according to the European school system, which make access to school easier forthe children of expats and foreigners.
Free access to childcare facilities and school meals
Luxembourg education aims to offer equal opportunities to all pupils so that they can live up to their potential. In this spirit,reception in non-formal education structureswas thus made free of charge during school weeks. It is free of charge for "maisons relais", educational daycare ("foyers scolaires") and parental assistants.
In addition,quality school meals are free for all studentsduring the same periods, regardless of parental income.
Learning cycles
Cycle 1(3 years) means preschool education for children from 3 to 5 years of age. While the first year (early childhood education) is optional, it iscompulsory for every child to go to school from the age of 4. This cycle mainly focuses on children'ssocial experience, but emphasis is also placed on discovering new languages and cultures.
Cycles 2 to 4are each composed of 2 years. At the end of each cycle, pupils must acquire defined learning objectives known asskill bases. In primary school, the spheres of competence to be acquired are as follows:
Did you know?
SUPER SENIORasuccessful intergenerational service and networkingIn almost 23 municipalities in Luxembourg, 29 senior citizens accompany children in primary schools and help them todo their homework, according to their own rhythm, and toregain their self-confidence. The project was developed by the non-for-profitMouvement pour l'égalité des chances pour tous(MEC), with the financial support of the local action groupLEADER Regioun Mëllerdall.
This exceptional tutoring service has also been selected as afinalist in the "social inclusion" category of the prestigious "Rural Inspiration Awards 2021".
Forms of assessment
The assessment of pupils is no longer handled with overall marks for each subject, but with detailed descriptions of acquired competences and skill bases reached. A formative assessment as part of the cycle provides guidance to pupils during the learning process, while a certificate-based assessment at the end of each cycle is used to determine whether the pupil has reached the required skills to move on to the next cycle.
For the transition to secondary education, anorientation procedureis in place at the beginning of cycle 4 to determine the most appropriate choice for individual pupils regarding their entry to secondary education. At the end of cycle 4, parents and the holder express a common decision on orientation.
Private educational facilities
In addition to public school provision, there are also11 private and fee-paying schoolsin the country that apply a different curriculum to the official one (with the exception ofl'École Notre-Dame Sainte-Sophie) and receive subsidies from the state
Last update11.08.2025
For more information
School Leave
Secondary education
Languages at school
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/languages-school-education.html
Languages at school
Luxembourg is a cosmopolitan society, with multiple languages spoken on a daily basis among residents, expatriate communities and cross-border workers. So it is only natural that Luxembourg's education system also gives pupils the opportunity to grow and learn in a multilingual environment from their very early years.
Languages and the way they work in the education system
Multilingualismin schools in Luxembourg represents astrengthin an open, diversified world, but also achallengefor pupils with different linguistic backgrounds. The Luxembourg education system is mainly based onGerman and French. German is the language of instruction at primary school and for the first years of secondary school, while French is used to teach most subjects in the upper years of secondary school. But Luxembourg is also pursuing a policy to diversify its school options, offeringinternational French- and English-speaking classes, welcome classes and a system of intercultural mediators.
Primary education: learning the administrative languages
Primary education in Luxembourg is composed of four two-year cycles. In the first cycle (children aged 3 to 5), the curriculumplaces strong emphasis on learning Luxembourgish. Following the adoption of a programme for multilingual education in crèches (nurseries),familiarising children with French is now also one of the objectives of the first cycle of schooling.
In the subsequent cycles (ages 6-12),literacy is taught in German, which is also the language of instruction for all other subjects except French lessons. Pupils are taught spokenFrenchin the second cycle and written French in the third cycle.
Secondary school: language diversification
The use of languages inthe secondary education curriculum varies according to the chosen system,but language learning continues to play a central role.Germanremains the language of instruction in the first years of secondary school in all subjects apart from French and maths.
Frenchbecomesthe language of instruction in classical secondary educationfrom the fourth year.Englishis taught from the second year to all pupils except those in theLatin section, who start English one year later. Pupils who wish to do so can adda fourth modern languagelike Italian, Spanish or Portuguese from their fifth year.
Ingeneral secondary education,Germanmostly remains the language of instruction, with some exceptions (certain subjects, classes with a specific language regime, etc.).
Welcoming children in their language(s)
Given the multilingual population in Luxembourg,it is not unusual to seepupils who do not speak any of the country's three administrative languages joining the educational system. For these pupils,Luxembourg's secondary schoolsoffer specific programmes, including intensive tutoring in French or German, classes taught in French, welcome and integration classes, as well as classes for English speakers.
Alongside Luxembourg's mainstream public schools, there are alsointernational schools, open to all pupils at primary or secondary level without fees, which prepare pupils for an International Baccalaureate in French, English or German. Some of these schools also offer classes at preschool level.
Finally,private international schoolsalso offer multilingual education. At these schools, Luxembourgish is taught to all pupils as a foreign language.
Find out more aboutall the available school optionshere.
An international university
Multilingualismis one of thekey principlesof theUniversity of Luxembourg. The teaching languages are generallyFrench and German. Some study programmes also require a good command ofEnglish, and the University offers a programme inLuxembourgish Linguistics and Literature.
Did you know?
Apilot projectwas launched at the beginning of the 2022-2023 academic year in four primary schools to give pupils the possibility of learning to read and write in French.Literacy in Frenchis optional for pupils in cycles 1 and 2. The aim of the project is to improve pupils' chances of success by offering a flexible, diverse approach to language learning. You can find more details about the programme "ALPHA – Zesumme wuessen" in themagazine EDI(no. 1 – 2025) published by the Luxembourg Ministry of Education, Children and Youth.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Secondary education
Schooling for foreign children
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/secondary-education.html
Secondary education
Secondary education is for children aged 12 and older. A key moment in life and in a pupil's schooling, since it involves choosing a future career, both academic and professional. That's why secondary schools in the Grand Duchy offer such a wide range of approaches, courses and diplomas.
Accompanying pupils in achieving their aims
Luxembourg's education system aims to give all pupils the chance to gain the highest possible qualification in keeping with their abilities and interests, regardless of their origin. This is an ambitious task, given the social, linguistic and technological changes taking place in society, but the Grand Duchy intends to achieve it via a number of routes:
Luxembourg allowshigh schools themselves the opportunity to promote pedagogical innovation through its school projects. Each school project defines the objectives that a school sets for itself in the following years, such as a competency-based assessment, a stronger foothold in its region, a holistic approach or better student motivation. The aim is to enable the secondary schools to implement targeted and often innovative solutions that meet the school's specific requirements.
Some high schools offer courses in fields that are not taught elsewheresuch as theBrevet de technicien supérieur(BTS) in Animationgat Lycée des Arts et Métiers. Are you a sports hopeful? TheSportlycéewith its high-level programmes for sports talent has been designed for young people like you. Tempted by gastronomy or tourism? TheLuxembourg School of Hotel Management and Tourismwill prepare you for a career in the hotel and catering trades. So wherever their interests lie, all pupils can find the school career best matched to their plans.
How secondary education is organised
Secondary education coversseven school years, divided into two types:
Classic secondary education (enseignement secondaire classique- ESC)
The objective of Classical Secondary Education is toimpart general knowledgein the fields of humanities and literature, mathematics and natural sciences.
This type of educationprepares above all for higher and university studies; asecondary school leaving diploma(Diplôme de fin d'études secondaires) is awarded on completion.
General secondary education (enseignement secondaire général- ESG)
General secondary education essentially prepares for professional life, but also allows the pursuit of studies. On completion, students obtain a technical secondary school leaving diploma, which allows access to higher education.
Vocational training
Basic professional training allows students to acquire the necessaryprofessional qualificationswith a corresponding diploma:
There is also apreparatory scheme, which is a separate route for pupils whose performance at fundamental school is deemed inadequate.
Other offers
In addition to the State-run secondary schools, there are also several secondary schools in the Grand Duchy that offer schooling for specific needs, as well as a number of private schools. The website of the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth presentsthe entire offer of schooling in the Grand Duchy.
Offer of international schooling
Certain secondary schools and international schools in the Grand Duchy offer schoolingleading to one of theinternational or European baccalaureates(in English, German or French) that match the specific needs of the various communities in the Grand Duchy.
Private secondary schools
There areten State-subsidised private secondary schoolsin the Grand Duchy. Five operate according to the Luxembourg curriculum; the other five draw up their own curricula.
National school for adults (Ecole Nationale pour Adultes - ENAD)
TheNational school for adults, which is based on an innovative educational concept, is an integral part of the State-run school system.
The school is for allyoung people between the ages of 16 and 30who, because of poor academic results or bad choices,have dropped out of school or are unable to find an apprenticeship. The ENAD offers these young people a different scheme to secondary schools, mainly by paying particular attention to supervision and personalised tutoring.
Last update11.08.2025
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
School Leave
Schooling for foreign children
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/school-leave.html
School Leave
These are the dates for the school holidays of the public institutions for the academic year 2025-2026.
01/11/25 – 09/11/25
Christmas
20/12/25 – 04/01/26
Carnival
14/02/26 – 22/02/26
Easter
28/03/26 – 12/04/26
Pentecost (Whit Sunday)
23/05/26 – 31/05/26
Summer
16/07/26 – 14/09/26
Last update15.09.2025
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Secondary education
Languages at school
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/schooling-for-foreign-children.html
Schooling for foreign children
The Grand Duchy has welcomed thousands of families from all over the world: indeed almost half the population does not have Luxembourg nationality. Each family has its own linguistic and cultural origins, but there is one thing they all need: quality education for their children. That's why the Grand Duchy offers a number of services to help foreigners' children to integrate fully in the Luxembourg school system, because a good education is one of the most important foundations for good social cohesion.
Languages in the Grand Duchy's schools
Communication of any kind within Luxembourg society calls for a good knowledge of languages.So language teaching is a central feature of the Luxembourg education system, the aimbeing not only to facilitate communication between the different language communities in the Grand Duchy, but also to overcome cultural barriers. That is why all schools in the Grand Duchy teach a large number of languages as part of the official curriculum:
Alarge number of initiativesexist to help the children offamilies recently arrived in the Grand Duchyintegrate more quickly, includingintegrated classesin the child's mother tongue, if the child is Portuguese,reception classes for German-, French- and English-speaking children, and the possibility of following classes leading to theinternational baccalaureate in either French or English.
Specialised services for foreign children
Dedicated services within the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth will be happy to answer any questions you may have:
The School Integration and Welcoming Service (SIA -Service de l'intégration et de l'accueil scolaires):
The School Integration and Welcoming Service
To take advantage of this SIA offer, you canmake an appointment online.
Intercultural mediators
Parents, teachers and school authoritiescan request the free help ofan intercultural mediatorwho speaks other foreign languages in addition to the languages spoken in Luxembourg. Mediators assist foreign pupils and parents of foreign pupils at the first reception, translate information about previous schooling in the country of origin, provide oral translations during parent/teacher interviews, for example, assist punctually or regularly in class, etc.
Last update11.08.2025
For more information
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Secondary education
Languages at school
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/faire-garder-son-enfant.html
Childcare
How can we make sure that all children get the best chances from an early age, regardless of their background? Luxembourg has taken several measures to ensure that children can enjoy quality childcare services, making sure enough spaces are available and offering financial assistance to families. Thus, it has become possible in Luxembourg to guarantee children aged 1 to 4, who are not subject to compulsory schooling and who do not attend full-time early education, free childcare hours when they are enrolled in an education and childcare service or a mini-crèche.
Quality childcare services
The quality of the care provided is not just measured in terms of infrastructures and safety standards; it alsoincludes the educational services offered by care facilities, in other words the programmes and activities available. The standard of these services is monitored by an educational quality system, the implementation of which is regularly monitored.
Specifically,each Education and Care Service (Service d'éducation et d'accueil- SEA) is required to:
The government therefore guarantees that whatever care facility you choose for your child, the same high standards will be applied.
Free supervision
From the age of 4 on 1 September, children subject to compulsory schooling who attend basic education or the equivalent are entitled to free childcare during school weeks, Monday to Friday from 7.00 am to 7.00 pm, except for any extra hours charged by the education and childcare facility.
For childcare before 7am and after 7pm, and during the holidays, parents pay according to the childcare service voucher (CSA) scale.
Facilities for all
For young children (but not exclusively), there are several types of childcare facilities:
Nurseries (crèches)
Nurseries (crèches) are for childrenaged between 3 months and 4 years, in other words before they begincompulsory schooling. They operate according to different educational concepts. There are crèches that emphasise organic values, company crèches, multilingual crèches, woodland crèches (Bëschcrèche), and so on. As parents, you are free to choose the crèche you prefer for your child.
Mini-crèches
The mini-crèches aredecentralised structures which can care for up to 11 kids from 0 to 12 years. Their goal is to strengthen the offer, especially in rural areas. A minimum of 2 people are needed to manage a mini-crèche, while respecting security, hygiene and quality norms. This includes the multilingual education programme.
Day nurseries
Day nurseries take childrenaged between 2 months and 8 yearsfor a maximum of 16 hours per week. This is a good occasional solution for families and also a way of getting children who are looked after on their own used to being with other children. Like crèches, day nurseries may be run by the municipality, operated under an agreement with the State, or be privately owned.
Parental assistants
There is also the possibility of having your child looked after by a parental assistant, a person who looks afterchildren aged 0 to 12in their home, on a paid basis, in a family setting. The timetables are often more flexible than those of crèches or nurseries and sick children may be accepted. For more information on parental assistants, go toAgence Dageselteren.
What about the older children?
Each family has different needs. Thus, there are several types of care for children in school:
Day centres
Day centres take school childrenaged between 4 and 12, in other words up to the end of fundamental education. Day centres are open outside classroom hours and during school holidays. The children eat lunch together in the canteen and do their homework there in the afternoon.
Maisons relais
Maisons relaisoffer greaterflexibility in terms of opening hoursand services than crèches or day nurseries. They look afterchildren from the age of 3 or 4 up to 12, and in some cases up to the age of 18. They are open from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and offer supervision, meals, activities and help with homework.
Last update25.07.2025
For more information
Childcare Service Vouchers
Family allowances
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/inclusion-disability-luxembourg.html
Sascha Lang: people with disabilities must be involved in defining inclusion
Sascha Langis a communications officer in Luxembourg’s Ministry of Family Affairs. He is passionate about communication and the media and is in charge of improving the diffusion of information about people with disabilities. His approach aims to empower people with disabilities and he is passionate about this mission as he has been blind since he was three years old.
What does your work as communications officer involve?Can you tell us more about what you did before starting to work for the Ministry of Family Affairs?
My role as communications officer involves a number of tasks, one of them is to coordinate different parts of the action plan [editor’s note:The National Action Plan for the Implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities(CRDPH), document in French], that is to say, to improve the communication of information about the work that we are carrying out in the Ministry. However, I do not work on media communication,my role mainly involves improving the flow of information between the people and the institutions who are concerned by this action plan and passing this information on to the general public.
In 1979, I joined the Institute for the Visually Impaired (Blanneschoul). But, in 1982, I started going to a normal school as it was thought that the Institute was not encouraging me enough. I passed the High School admission’s test in 1987.In 1997, I first got involved with the events sector and since then I have worked in this area doing things such as organising concerts, interviewing people and working on the radio.In 2000, I decided to pass Luxembourg’s public sector exam and since then, up until 31 March 2023, I worked for the post office in the collection department. But I only worked part time as I was still self-employed working in the events sector and organising concerts. On the 1 April, 2023, I changed jobs and started working for the Ministry of Family Affairs, but in parallel I have continued to work for myself on radio productions, programmes, Podcasts, round tables and conferences, all on the theme of inclusion.
You have been blind since you were three years old, something which is considered to be a disability.How would you define the word disability and what does the word inclusion mean to you?Do you think that inclusion has been achieved or, if not, when do you think it will be?
I do not define myself as a person with a disability.It is true that I have a disability, but this disability is influenced by external factors. For me,the notion of disability involves a lot more than just my body, as it does not influence my personality.I am who I am.It is the environment that I live in that affects me.It is not possible for the society to remove all barriers and this, in fact, means that people become disabled. This means that we are all disabled, in one way or another, even people who do not think that they have a disability.
Let me explain this with an example. Imagine that there are three people in front of a shop – a person in a wheelchair, a blind person and a person who does not have any money. None of these three people are able to go into the shop. If there is no wheelchair ramp, the first person is not able to go into it. The blind person could enter the shop, but they will not be able to see what they are buying and the poor person could also enter the shop but they will not have enough money to be able to buy anything in it. So, all three of these people have a very different type of disability.
In order to create inclusive societies, we – the people who are directly concerned by this – must be a lot more active ourselves. What I mean is, it is not possible to achieve inclusion just by thinking that society will include us, we must also be present and come into contact with people who do not have disabilities. We must interact with them and, through this, teach other people what inclusion is. If we clearly state what we need, people can adapt to us and we can also adapt to them, whether they have a disability or not.
Inclusion is not something that will ever be completely achievedas there is no such thing as 100% inclusion or even 100% accessibility.Today, the problem is that we are not where we should be concerning accessibilit. There are so many things that we need to change. That is not something that we can do quickly. Also, removing something that is a barrier to inclusion for me could create a barrier to inclusion for someone else. So, for me, inclusion is a continuous process, as our society is constantly evolving.It is a process that will never finish.
Luxembourg has already introduced a lot of actions and projects to improve the inclusion of employees with disabilities in the workplace.Which one of these projects is the most important for you and why?
For the moment I do not think that I am aware of any project that has allowed us to achieve greater inclusion. Although there are things such as employee with a disability status and we receive a lot of assistance, for me these actions do not go far enough, we are clearly lacking workplace personal assistants. But in general,there are two problems:the first is that there are not enough employers who dare to hire people with disabilities.This is why we need to raise more awareness around this subject. The other problem is that there arepeople with disabilities who are looking for jobs for which they do not have received enough training. This is why I am requesting the introduction of workplace personal assistants. For me, this is essential. We need workplace personal assistants because there are many people with disabilities who have a lot of skills. For example, I am thinking about the case of a judge in Trier who would not be able to carry out her job if she did not have assistance at work, as she is not able to turn the pages of her judgement documents by herself due to a disability that affects her use of her arms. This is just one example, but there are many others like it.
The State can intervene in different areas to allow employees with disabilities to be integrated in an adapted way.In particular, state sponsored benefits can cover wages, training, work station adaptation, professional equipment and even special training equipment.They can also cover transport costs.What is the impact of these benefits on the recruitment of people with disabilities/the whole of the job market?
These benefits have a significant impact but, again, the problem is that a lot of people do not know that they exist.The information about them is not clear enough in the private sector.Employers often do not know where to start, they do not know what information they can ask for or what benefits they can obtain.There are still too many contact points that are missing. We should create a coherent system that would make it possible for people to find all this information in one place. What is more, we need to raise awareness and further involve employers so that we can reduce their fears about hiring people with disabilities.
What personal experience have you had with these benefits during your professional career?
I have worked in the public sector, so things were easier for me, but I have to say that technical support is something that is very important.I have only ever had positive experiences.
The Ministry for Family Affairs, Integration and the Greater Region has started an initiative concerning inclusion assistance.Can you give us some more details about this initiative?
The idea is that, once they have found a job, a person with a disability will be accompanied byan inclusion assistant. This will allow connections to be made between the employer, their employees and the person with a disability to improve accessibility as well as so that the people who work for this employer can remove a certain number of obstacles. This also means that they will have a point of contact, because maybe a person with a disability will do things in a slightly different way, and that the different parties will be able to understand each other. That is the basic idea. In theory this is a great initiative, but the problem is that the inclusion assistant only becomes involved once a contract has been signed, which is far too late on. It would be better if they were involved a lot earlier, as they might be able to convince more employers to hire people with disabilities if they were accompanied from the beginning or even during a development step or phase. The inclusion assistant is a good idea, but they become involved too late on in the process.
Sascha Lang was born in 1975.He lost his sight when he was three years old, however, this did not stop him from continuing his studies and passing his bachelor's degree.Passionate about the media since he was a child, Sascha Lang went on topresent musical programmes on the radio and share his passion with his listeners. After this he then moved into producing and managing artists before, in 2009, returning to work on radio programmes about the topic of inclusion. In parallel, Sascha Lang set up his own internet radio station, SLANG – the radio station for a life without barriers – which was active until 2014.Sascha Lang is an inclusion ambassador and activist who is present at all levels in both Germany and Luxembourgwhere he works on improving the inclusion of people with disabilities.In 2020, he started his own IGEL podcast on RTL Luxembourgwhich is available in both Luxembourgish and German.
You have employee with a disability/reduced work capacity status.What is the difference between the employee with a disability and employee with reduced work capacity status?
I have employee with a disability status, this means that I have six additional days of holiday and my employer receives benefits. An employee with reduced work capacity is not able to work full time.But I do not work part time because I have a disability, I do this because I like doing other things as well.However, I suppose that, as I understand it, it could be that a person with reduced work capacity status can no longer work full time due to their disability and so their working hours are limited.
You have been self-employed and now you work for the State in the public sector.What have been the biggest changes in how employees with a disability are perceived compared to 10 years ago?Have the employee with a disability and employee with reduced work capacity  statuses helped this change?
I have always worked in both the public and private sector at the same time.I have worked for the government on one hand and since 2006/2007 I have been self-employed in the events sector and later also in the media sector.In Germany, I have a workplace personal assistant, but I do not have one in Luxembourg. But here, I do not really need one, although from time to time someone will accompany me to meetings. I can manage a lot of things myself.
I do not think that there is any difference in how people with disabilities are perceived because I do not define myself according to this status.Yes, I have the status of employee with a disability, that I obtained in 1997, but it is not important to me. I have this status, but I do not feel as though I am an employee with a disability. I feel as though I am a normal worker in a company.
It is very difficult to separate inclusion from accessibility.A new law about the accessibility of all places that are open to the public, public ways and municipality-owned residential buildings will come into force on the 1 July 2023.What is meant by accessibility and what role does it play in terms of inclusion?
Accessibility means that everyone should be able to access all public spaces, that is to say everywhere must be accessible, from hairdressers’ salons to banks. But accessibility does not just mean that places must be adapted for wheelchair users, they must also be accessible for people who are blind and all other people. When I build a ramp, I am not only building it for wheelchair users but also for pushchairs and walking frames.We need accessibility for inclusion, as we can only participate in society if we can go everywhere.So, it is important that we make society more accessible, as accessibility will allow us to create new means for inclusion.Accessibility does not mean 100% inclusion, but accessibility can facilitate inclusion.
In summary, what (overall) message would you like to share?
People with disabilities must be involved in defining inclusion.We must be present, we must fight for a place in society. We should not wait for someone to come and fetch us at the door, we must dare to go out. We need to have an open, inclusive, society which allows us to participate in it. But we also need people with disabilities to be empowered, to be supported so that they are able to participate, we must give them the courage, desire and opportunity to be active. This can be done by teaching people with disabilities that they have rights, that is to say by motivating them to come out of their shells and fight to claim their rights.We must make ourselves visible as people with disabilities and defend our cause.
But if we are not able to change people’s mindsets, then inclusion will not work either. This is not something that can be done by using physical force or implementing laws, as this change needs to take place in people’s minds. But we have already made a lot of progress compared to a few years ago.
Thank you Sascha Lang for granting us this interview.
Last update13.08.2024
For more information
Culture for all: an overview
Luxembourg's workforce
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/culture-for-all.html
Culture for all: an overview
Participation in cultural life is a right recognised by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Moreover, protecting and promoting an individual's participation in culture helps to build a more inclusive, innovative and resilient society. In Luxembourg, associations and institutions are striving to make culture a tangible right accessible to all. Against this backdrop, theatres are hosting more inclusive projects, museums are becoming more accessible and theKulturpassprovides access to cultural performances for 1.50 euros.
TheKulturpass, providing access to culture to people on low incomes
Luxembourg, immersed in culture. The Grand Duchy hasmore than 60 museums, andtheatresare spread throughout the country. Also, many municipalities have cultural centres with a multilingual programming that covers all types of performing arts. However,a large part of the population has no access to culture because of their precarious situation.
Since 2008,Cultur'Allhas been committed to ensuring that everyone has access to culture. The objective of the association is to raise awareness of cultural rights across society and among policy makers as well as to facilitate access to culture, in particular for people who find themselves marginalised from cultural life because of their vulnerable social or economic situation. By encouraging participation in and access to cultural life, the association promotes cultural diversity and inter-social dialogue in close cooperation with its social and cultural partners.
The creation of theKulturpassis the result of these efforts. It enables people on low incomes living in Luxembourg, or those who have applied for international or temporary protection, to participate in Luxembourg's cultural life.This is a free and individual card, valid for two years, which provides free access to, among others, partner museums or allows to buy a ticket to a cultural event for EUR 1.50. To date, the network includesmore than 100 active partnersin various fields such as visual and graphic arts, music, cinema, etc.
Three questions to the managers of Cultur'All
1. The Cultur'All association was founded in 2008 and its first concrete action was to introduce theKulturpass, which has been available since 2010. Why was this measure selected? After more than 10 years of work, what has been the overall impact?
TheKulturpasswas a quick and easy means to address the most obvious obstacle, the financial barrier.
From its beginnings, as an association working with volunteers, it now employs 1.25 full-time staff. Since the project was restructured at the end of 2014, theKulturpassnetwork has doubled. At present, we have a hundred cultural partners and almost fifty social partners. In 2015, 1,043 people obtained aKulturpassand today we have 4,425 active Kulturpass. The sale ofKulturpasstickets increased from 1,987 in 2015 to 4,400 in 2022 and we expect a sharper increase in 2023. We can say that we are now established on a national level and we have gained credibility abroad by organising an international symposium in our field of activity last year. Despite all of our progress, there remains much work to be done.
2. Recommendation no. 49 of the KEP 2018-2028 (Kulturentwécklungsplang– National Plan for Cultural Development) proposes to improve the dissemination and visibility of theKulturpass. In fact, one of the objectives of KEP in the field of 'Cultural Citizenship and Accessibility' is to extend the possibilities of theKulturpassto all the municipalities in the country. Has the recommendation been implemented? What is the current status?
We are in fact dealing with the issue of citizenship, especially cultural citizenship. The marginalisation of a part of the population from Luxembourg's cultural life is only part of the wider phenomenon of poverty and social exclusion. In the same vein, we see the Kulturpass as a lever that can help people participate in society and claim their natural rights as citizens.
TheKulturpassis only part of the answer. The other side of our work evolves around creating and maintaining links between the social and cultural fabric in order to give our beneficiaries the chance to exercise their rights to participate in cultural life and society as a whole. To return to KEP recommendation 49, we consider that, despite increasing support from the Ministry of Culture, there is still a lot of work to do. However, this issue goes beyond the scope of KEP and requires more concerted support from public authorities.
3. TheKulturpassfacilitates access to culture, i.e. its consumption or participation could be considered as 'passive', even if it fulfils the wishes of the user. However, cultural rights are also a form of active participation in cultural creation, which can also be a means of social inclusion. Does Cultur'All implement related projects with the active participation of the most disadvantaged citizens? Does it work with other associations?
Our work consists of managing the continuous expansion of theKulturpassnetwork, raising awareness among our partners, creating ties within this network, improving theKulturpass operating system, developing a more complete and coherent narrative by bringing the world of disability closer together, finding new solutions to develop and multiply the dissemination of information as well as identifying marginalised audiences.
We also have the basis of a cultural mediation tool box that was kindly given to us by our friends from the Article 27 association (in Belgium) and whose main objective is to strengthen people's sense of citizenship via culture. In essence, it is about giving people the right to position themselves in relation to the work, to leave a little space to allow them to express their opinion and to value their point of view. At the moment we do not have the means to implement this goal.
Museums, theatres and heritage for all
Museums
Various museums have been developing initiatives for several years aimed at fostering inclusive participation in cultural life.
The two museums of the city of Luxembourg, theLëtzebuergCity Museumand theVilla Vauban, offer guided tours for people with special needs. All of their exhibits are accessible and they offer three types of visits:
The duration varies according to the type of tour and the needs of the participants. Reservations are required for these tours (email:visites@2musees.vdl.lu). In addition, all rooms in both museums are wheelchair accessible. These initiatives have received theEureWelcome Luxembourglabel, which measures user-friendliness and accessibility for all.Furthermore, theLëtzebuergCity Museumand theVilla Vaubanofferdiscounted rates, includingfree entry on certain evenings, as well as for young people, students and people with disabilities.
For its part,theGrand Duke Jean Museum of Modern Art - Mudam Luxembourgalso caters for visitors with special needswith:
The entire Mudam is wheelchair-accessible. Manual wheelchairs are available to visitors on request at the reception. For certain tours, please make book in advance with the Museum's General Public Department (email:visites@mudam.lu). TheMudamalso offers discounted tickets and free admission on Wednesday nights as well as for young people and students.
Luxembourg's museums have also turned to digital technology in recent years, thus helping to broaden the general public’s access to culture. As such, people are unable to travel or leave home can also enjoy the museum collections.
TheNationalmusée um Fëschmaart, museum of history and art, can be explored via a series ofimmersive and interactive 3D tours. The museum collections have been scanned using state-of-the-art technology and now offer a comprehensive 3D tour. In addition,virtual exhibitions of their collectionsare also available on their website. Admission to the permanent exhibition is free and discounted rates are also available for young people and students.
TheNational Museum of Natural History – Naturmuséealso offers a 3D tours of its collections. TheNaturmuséealso offers discounted rate. Admission for young people and students is free.
You can alsodiscover theDräi EechelenMuseumwith its casemates and the underground galleries of the Olizy and Niedergrünewald forts, via immersive and interactive 3D tours. In this way, people with reduced mobility can visit areas which, due to the architecture of the historic sites, are not easily accessible. All exhibitions of theDräi EechelenMuseumare free.
Castles and forts
For several years, thecastle of Useldangehas been providing a cultural tour for the visually impaired. The routes around the castle and inside the castle tower have been designed under the auspices of UNESCO. The tour consists of 16 stations adapted for the visually impaired, allowing them to feel, listen to and touch the history of the building.
The catalogue of the tour of theold quarters and fortifications of the City of Luxembourg- which is classified as a UNESCO World Heritage site - has been extended withtwo audio guides and a brochure for people with special needs:
Performing arts
TheMierscher Theaterhas been behind many inclusive projects for the past 10 years or more. With a desire to push the boundaries even further, this cultural spacehas created a network of professional artists and cultural and social institutions to promote inclusion in the field of culture:Mosaik Kultur Inklusiv.
Diversity, individuality and singularity are at the heart of this project, which places a special emphasis on representation on stage. Thebrochure for the 2023 seasonis available in German: dance, workshops, readings and music await you! Several of the performances are accompanied by German sign language interpretation.
Guaranteed access to culture
In line with its policy to ensure all members of society have access to culture, theMinistry of Culture has been launching calls for projects since 2021. The aim is to help cultural institutions to make their programming accessible to people at risk of exclusion, for whom culture can be a pillar of development. This financial support also seeks to develop and strengthen the links between cultural and social actors and to train professionals in cultural institutions.
One of the latest calls for projects is dedicated to ensuring access to culture in prisons.Kultur am Prisongis a means to bring cultural projects into prisons, thereby allowing prisoners to participate in events and take a first step towards cultural inclusion.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 27.1
UNESCO
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Arts and culture
Volunteering
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/volunteering-foundation-kraizbierg-corporate-luxembourg.html
Volunteering
In Luxembourg, 35% of the population volunteered in 2022, placing the country fourth in Europe in terms of the proportion of volunteers. The voluntary sector and volunteering play a key role in the cohesion and development of our societies. Driven by values of solidarity, citizenship and respect, they are expressed through the free and voluntary commitment of individuals to serve others or the collective interest. Voluntary service offers young people under the age of 30 the opportunity to devote themselves full-time to a project of general interest for a fixed period. In addition, more and more companies are encouraging their employees to participate in corporate volunteering for the benefit of charitable organisations. In Luxembourg, as elsewhere, these forms of engagement contribute to building more inclusive societies.
Agence du Bénévolat- promoting action, strengthening solidarity
Since 2002,theAgence du Bénévolathas been working to promote and develop volunteer work in Luxembourgamong public authorities, organisations that use volunteers and the general public. Its portalwww.benevolat.lupresents associations active in Luxembourg and offers a volunteer exchange that allows interested individuals to find activities and associations to recruit volunteers.
Every year, theAgence du Bénévolatawards thePrix du Mérite du Bénévolat, recognising unpaid work and highlighting the valuable contribution made by the many volunteers active in Luxembourg.It also offers aBénévolatquality label,allowing associations to distinguish themselves through the quality of their organisation and support of the volunteers.
Did you know?
The knowledge and skills acquired through voluntary activities can be officially recognised. Anyone who has participated in a voluntary project or completed training offered by an association can receive a certificate issued by the organisation concerned. This document certifies the tasks performed and the skills developed. In addition, volunteers can apply forValidation of Acquired Experience(VAE) from the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth. This certification, which is intended for those who have accumulated significant experience in volunteering, can facilitate job searches, professional development or a change of role.
Volunteering – young people get involved
Voluntary service is another form of engagement, allowing young people under the age of 30 to participate in a supervised project of general interestfor a maximum of 12 months, in Luxembourg or abroad. Volunteering is an opportunity to combine a commitment to the common good with an experience that allows you to acquire skills that are useful in the professional world, such as self-awareness, autonomy, responsibility and teamwork. It is also a great human experience.
In Luxembourg, theNational Youth Serviceis the main point of contact for voluntary service. The websitevolontaires.luprovides information on the conditions for becoming a volunteer, organisations offering public service assignments and the necessary training.There are three types of voluntary service: national, European and cooperation. The website is also aimed at organisations wishing to host volunteers in Luxembourg or abroad. Any public or private body established in Luxembourg can apply for accreditation to become a voluntary service organisation.
Good to know
Young people under the age of 30 can obtaina certificate of their voluntary work or volunteer commitment, issued by the National Youth Service. This document describes the tasks performed and the skills acquired. It can be used as additional information when looking for a job or as part of an application for accreditation of prior learning.
When companies commit to a better world
Corporate volunteering is an approach that enables companies to encourage their employees to volunteer with associations. This concept acts as a bridge between the business world and the voluntary sector, creating a win-win situation. Charities benefit from specific skills, human support and increased visibility, while companies strengthen their internal cohesion, boost team motivation and consolidate their local roots. For example, a bank can mobilise its employees to assist a charity with its financial management, while an industrial company can make its teams available to renovate premises or support the logistics of a charity event. The success of such projects depends on rigorous preparation: identifying the needs of associations, clarifying the expectations of companies and organising tasks in a concrete and realistic manner. In Luxembourg,theAgence du Bénévolatplays a central role as an intermediary, supporting both parties in establishing balanced and sustainable partnerships.
TheKräizbiergFoundation – a welcoming family
Volunteering Day is celebrated every year on 5 December. During this festive period,theAteliersKräizbiergof theKräizbiergFoundationorganise their JingleMoart. Over two days, visitors can discover the workshops, take a look behind the scenes and purchase original items created by the foundation, perfect as gifts or Christmas decorations. EvenKleeschendoesn't miss this event, which is full of activities, music and treats.
The foundation and workshops regularly seek volunteers to participate in its events, particularly JingleMoart, but also throughout the year, to help with the production and sale of products. This year, three companies have committed to corporate volunteering. For three days, small groups of employees lent a hand to help organise and run the market. This form of corporate citizenship (CSR) is encouraged byJPMorganChase,LSC360andFM Insurance Europe S.A. Employees and the foundation benefit from this commitment, which promotes the development of valuable skills, practical assistance, team spirit, a sense of purpose and increased motivation.
TheKräizbiergFoundation, created in 1977,is a Luxembourg organisation dedicated to the inclusion and support of people with physical disabilities. It offers homes, professional workshops and training services to promote their independence and social and professional integration, while improving their living conditions.
Galerie
Ateliers Kräizbierg - Jingle Moart
Image - A child meets St. Nicholas together with his father and mother.
© Ateliers Kräizbierg, Mélissa Lowin
Ateliers Kräizbierg - Jingle Moart
Image - Entrance sign to the sweet Kleeschenshop
© Ateliers Kräizbierg, Mélissa Lowin
Ateliers Kräizbierg - Jingle Moart
Image - Team members dressed up for the Christmas market.
© Ateliers Kräizbierg, Mélissa Lowin
Ateliers Kräizbierg - Jingle Moart
Image - Creative workshop for children at the Christmas market.
© Ateliers Kräizbierg, Mélissa Lowin
Ateliers Kräizbierg - Jingle Moart
Image - Decorations and candles at the Christmas market.
© Ateliers Kräizbierg, Mélissa Lowin
Ateliers Kräizbierg - Jingle Moart
Image - Visitors in the Kräizbierg workshops.
© Ateliers Kräizbierg, Mélissa Lowin
The foundation is based on strong values such as inclusion, openness, respect and empathy, which guide its daily activities. It has several homes throughout Luxembourg, as well as a day centre. Beneficiaries have access to a wide range of training courses and workshops, including screen printing, gardening, multimedia, accounting, embroidery and pottery.
To get involved with theKräizbiergFoundation, it is generally advisable to go through theAgence du Bénévolator to contact the foundation directly for suitable assignments.
Last update08.01.2026
For more information
The social and solidarity economy and societal impact companies
Culture for all: an overview
Work life balance: a balanced concept for a well-balanced life
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/pierre-hurt-oai.html
Quality of life and living together in Luxembourg
The OAI has been a strong partner for stakeholders in the construction industry for over 30 years. Beyond its advisory role for companies and political decision-makers it is also the driving force behind the development of Luxembourg’s building culture, which involves all citizens. In this context, with rapidly rising property prices and the fight against climate change it currently faces some huge challenges. Pierre Hurt, Director of the OAI, has taken the time to discuss these with us.
The Order of Architects and Consulting Engineers has united all stakeholders in Luxembourg’s construction industry for over 30 years. What were the initial ideas behind its foundation?
Architects and consulting engineers shape our shared living space, it was therefore crucial to regulate these professions.As Luxembourg is a small country, it also seemed like a sensible idea to combine both professions in one association that was supported by former minister, Robert Goebbels.
Pursuing this path clearly turned out to be the right choice, asour environment can only be designed and planned with the cooperation of all parties involved.
In 1985, the European Directive on freedom to provide services and freedom of establishment also required all Member States to have an organisation dedicated to service providers.
Resilience is an important watchword for you. What, in your opinion, is the building industry’s role in this respect?
Our role is one of the most fundamental, if not the most fundamental factor for resilience: living and working are closely interconnected here. It is thereforeessential that we plan our structures – not only in the construction industry – in such a way that we remain capable of action even in times of crisis.Think of a foam ball that can be compressed tightly before returning to its original shape.
Resilience is initially based on a smart network at different levels, i.e. national, regional and local. More specifically, in our case this means that we increasingly use locally made building materials.
It also means that we take the total cost of our ways of life into consideration. We need to ask ourselves:'what added value are we creating for our society?' rather than 'how can we maximise the profits of a few dominant players?'.
How do companies in Luxembourg approach this topic?
Many companies in Luxembourg are currently working on it, and that’s a good thing. After all, resilience can only be a long-term success if we get all players on board – as is already the case in the circular economy.
In this respect, the health crisis has brought about a change in mindset. It has showed us that if we don’t respond to the current challenges, the climate crisis will present us with some entirely different challenges in future.In the long term, we’re talking about nothing short of a revolution, but one which offers us new possibilities.
Pierre Hurt has been the Director of the OAI since it was founded in 1990.In this role, he has introduced numerous initiatives that reflect his commitment, e.g. the OAI Reference Guide (Guideoai.lu), the Architectour.lu initiative, the Laix.lu exchange platform and the prestigious 'Bauhärepräis' award.He advocates smart and interconnected construction that benefits society, and as part of this endeavour he also supported, inter alia, theMOAI.LU(Maîtrise d’oeuvre OAI) methodology, a framework that helps different professional groups to cooperate on one project.He is a recognised proponent of social equality, sustainability and the 'slow'-movement.
How, in your opinion, should the stakeholders in the building sector behave to drive this revolution forward?
We have a small country with a great deal of potential. As such, we must also try to use our available resources the right way.This involves, above all, revaluing the conceptual stage of projects while keeping our objectives in mind,such as how we can be more resilient as a society. Builders, planners, users, administrative bodies and contractors all need to take part in this stage together.
However, the interests of these parties are often contradictory, so it sometimes seems likemission impossibleto bring these stakeholders together even if we’re actually acting in everyone’s best interests.
This is where independent members of the OAI come into play who implement objectives stipulated by policymakers. For us, these are liberal professions that not only create a product, but also the intellectual process behind it.
One of the challenges that your sector also needs to address is climate change. How are you dealing with this in Luxembourg?
On the one hand, we have been dealing with this topic for quite some time by organisingtraining courses together with institutions in Luxembourg and abroad.The construction phase of a building takes around three years. This time period gives a us framework within which we consistently help our members to take into account the developments in the building sector.
On the other hand, since 2020 we have been running a circular building project together with the Ministry of Energy and Spatial Planning.During the first phase, we drew up an inventory of all factors that impede a faster development of circular building as well as all of the initiatives and pilot projects in the sector.
We are now in the second phase of the project, whereby we are asking ourselves to what extent Luxembourg – and its partners in the Greater Region – can supply renewable construction materials. This also involvescommunity planning and urban development, as well as the topics of urban farming and urban gardening.
A further question pertains to theuse of projects - keyword multi-use.This is the only way that we can improve our quality of life and embrace the challenge ofsustainable building and the circular economy. As such, in a freehold flat development, for example, the front garden could serve as usable space, as opposed to creating a rockery there.
Can we do anything to fight climate change in a small country like Luxembourg?
My answer is a definite yes.The way we act in our everyday lives and our consumption and mobility habits can have a tangible influence on climate change. Look at everything we achieved in the short-term during the Covid crisis.Having said that, we need to be proactive– we shouldn’t let things get to the stage where our actions are dictated by fear.
So, is the sector ready to rise up to these issues and challenges?
Of course.Luxembourg is a pioneer in this area.We implemented the European Directive three years before the other EU countries. In fact,Luxembourg is one of Europe’s leaders when it comes to energy regulations.
A key factor in Luxembourg is the steep increase in population, which has an impact on population density and property prices, among other things. What attempts are being made to strike a balance between the rising property prices and maintaining quality of life?
In our society, we are getting a sense of what accounts for qualitative coexistence, as we are in a phase where some places already have high density levels.
This doesn’t mean that we are overpopulated; Germany’s Saarland has more inhabitants than Luxembourg. But we do need to redevelop our densely built regions, whether in Luxembourg-City, the Nordstadt area or in the south of the country, e.g. Esch.It’s important that this new development imparts a sense of coherence and quality of life. It’s funny that when we travel away from home, for example when visiting a city centre in Italy, we marvel at this building density. In Luxembourg, by contrast, properties are built on plots of land in such a way that they are demarcated from their neighbouring plots.
We also need tolearn to share and use building land fairly. This means tackling the issue of vacant properties, but also helping communities and towns in their efforts to create living space in cooperation with the private sector, as Luxembourg has some catching up to do in this respect.
It’s not only a question of social housing,we also need offerings for first-time buyers. Anyone who settles here to live and work must be able to enter the housing market and live in dignity without having to pay off a 50-year loan for the privilege. Otherwise our economy will collapse.
But above all, we cannot avoid discussing the issue of growth in Luxembourg.
Do you believe that it’s possible to foster intelligent growth while maintaining the quality of life that Luxembourg is renowned for?
Yes, if the politicians here ensure, for example, that a percentage of property is publicly owned so that we can preserve a market here for first-time buyers. This already follows from theconstitutional revision that should lay down rules on the right to housing. The pubic authorities must play an active role, which they already do, for example with the 'Pacte logement 2.0' (housing pact) for communities and private stakeholders.
One of the reasons for the current situation is thatwe don’t have enough publicly owned building land. A revolutionary idea from Austria offers a potential solution: in Vorarlberg, land is included within the construction perimeter at the current sales price, and the owner receives plots of land outside the perimeter as compensation. This land never ends up becoming the object of speculation: it’s where public sector housing projects are built.This way, we could create an offering in three to four years and relieve a great deal of pressure from the local market.
All that remains is the question of building faster. Procedures and regulations are naturally important, but there needs to be a social consensus that this is one of the questions we must ask ourselves when it comes to growth. Having a NIMBY mentality to prevent building projects won’t get us anywhere.
The keyword here is sufficiency. What do we really need in order to create added value for society? We must be aware of the answers to this question.
What are we particularly proud of?
During the 31 years since the OAI was founded, we have established and expandedafair, good working frameworkfor our members so that free planners can fulfil their role in society. Our members don't just'lay stones' they also lay the foundations of life; they create our living space and the culture of living together.
In 2004, the Government signed thearchitecture policy programme, which was a huge step forward towards more building culture.
Last but not least, the OAI is areliable and recognised partnerfor legal, professional and social aspects.
Together, these three successes define the OAI’s role in society and form the basis of its credibility.
Last update12.08.2024
For more information
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/maya-tal-foreign-musician-luxembourg.html
Being a musician in Luxembourg
ThePhilharmonieis unusually quiet as we walk through the light-flooded lobby, joined by Israeli violist Maya Tal. The young professional musician joined the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra, or OPL, a mere few months before Covid struck the European continent and much of our beloved cultural life was put on hold. The pandemic has left its mark on this building and its ensemble, the OPL. Rehearsals have had to be reorganised and the auditorium, which usually seats 1,500 people, currently only admits 100 spectators. Yet, Maya Tal does not regret the decision which she and her husband took to move to Luxembourg – even though they knew very little about the country to start with, they are more than happy with their choice.
Before you came here, did you know anything about Luxembourg?
Honestly, I didn’t know much. I had two friends who had been living here the past few years. They are both freelance musicians. And they told me thatit’s a beautiful place, filled with landscapes and forests and just the most amazing architecture, and that there’s an orchestra here that plays really well. And my husband and me were thinking that it would be areally nice place to start our life together.
Did you see those descriptions confirmed?
I did. I thought in the beginning that thepeople here were extremely genuine and kind, and that was just a huge relief.
In the very beginning, before Covid began, when still on trial, I didn’t have much time to travel. I was playing in the orchestra full-time, and during the weekend I was just resting. Butwhen Covid started and we were all sent home, I started seeing views of Luxembourg outside the city centre, and they were really just breathtaking. I remember taking a car and driving by everywhere. And we couldn’t get enough of it. We would come back home and the very next day we would travel once again. It was just beautiful.
Was there any view or experience in particular that stuck with you?
I think the first time that I visitedGrund, I was just amazed. It’s not really nature per se, it’s still somehow inside the city, which was even more special. There is this wall inGrundwhere you have this river, theAlzette,I stayed there for two hours just to absorb what I was seeing. Now I’m used to it, but when I first saw these kind of nature and valleys around here, it struck me. It was really an amazing experience.
May Tal was born in Tel Aviv in 1993 and started playing the violin when she was 6 years old. She studied in Israel and Germany, and is currentlyenrolled in a Masters programme at theHanns Eisler Hochschulein Berlin, under Prof. Tabea Zimmermann. Since moving to Luxembourg in 2019, she and her husband have come to enjoy the high quality of life offered by the country.
Was there any one element in particular that convinced you to give Luxembourg a shot?
I think this would not have anything to do with the country itself. It would have to do with the Philharmonie.The Philharmonie treats its musicians with utmost respect and you can sense in the country that music is well-loved, that it’s respected, that the government supports it everywhere they can. I’m not really familiar with the terms of being a freelance here in Luxembourg, but as an employee of Philharmonie and subject to the government here, I felt that music here enjoys a very high priority. Which is not always the same where I come from.
Is that Luxembourg’s biggest advantage?
The love for the arts is felt. I think especially now, in this crisis, because art seems like something that is really not mandatory, but in fact it really is. And just the fact that Philharmonie kept on going whatever way it could was a real testament to this kind of work environment.
Is there a reputation of Luxembourg among international artists?
My professor – I am still a student actually in Berlin –Tabea Zimmermann, her husband was a chief conductor here, his name was David Shallon. She was here many times, and from her I only heard the nicest things about Luxembourg. But I think,you can’t really understand what it’s really like to be here until you live here.
After 2 years of living here now, if you had to tell a friend about the country, what would you tell them?
I would tell them thatit’s really serene, that it’s calm. Never have I lived somewhere that I could fulfill whatever I wanted.I have the time and the energy to do everything. It’s not exhausting, like living in a big metropolis. So, it’s really comfortable and very adapted to families. And people are really kind, I cannot demonstrate enough – where I come from, people can be very loud and in your face, and people here really respect the individual.
In a way we are not involved with a lot of Luxembourgish communities, which I feel is a problem. Because at the orchestra there are very few musicians who are originally from Luxembourg. And it is felt, also in the way that we play.There are many different education systems blended into one orchestra, unlike living in Germany or France, where you have just this one type of school and music education. And since we are not involved with a lot of Luxembourgish natives, I feel like a lot of it is missed. We are not super close with our audience which is mostly Luxembourgish, I would say.
Would you say that this blending of different backgrounds is actually helpful to the OPL?
It is.I feel like you are never a foreigner in Luxembourg. I feel like it’s the biggest advantage of living here. Because when you walk on the street, you don’t feel like, ‘Oh, I don’t speak this language and it’s a problem’. I feel like wherever you go, you will find a group that will be similar to your mentality or background. I have a very good friend in the orchestra, and she’s Armenian. We come from very different places, but they are really feeling like the same. So, even if there aren’t many Israelis here, I don’t feel alone here at all. Which is special.
How long are you thinking about staying in Luxembourg?
I think the future is unclear to us all, as musicians. I can only hope that I will stay here for a long time. My husband and I, when we had just met, we had no idea that we were going to live in Luxembourg, but then here we are.Of course I would like to stay here, that is the hope. Starting a family here would be really amazing.
Last update25.02.2026
For more information
Quality of life
Classical music for you to enjoy
Work life balance: a balanced concept for a well-balanced life
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/luxembourg-internations-excpatries.html
Luxembourg elected 'very ecological' by expats
In its latest report on destinations for expats, the InterNations network put the environment and sustainability of host countries in the limelight. 60 countries were analysed and Luxembourg was ranked 10th.
Luxembourg is considered to be one of the safest countries on earth. But what are the views of foreigners in the Grand Duchy on its ecological or even sustainable nature?
The latest report of theInterNations networkprovides us with an answer to this question. This time, an overall ranking of the best destinations for expats in 2020 was not established. Instead, it focused onanalysing the environment and sustainable development.
ThisEnvironment & Sustainability Rankinghas scrutinized the ecological behaviour and the concern of the inhabitants for the environment as well as the political awareness for ecological topics. For example, waste management and recycling, environmental policy, energy supply or air quality and water treatment were analysed.
In this report,Luxembourg was ranked 10th out of 60 countriesthat were analysed, just behind Germany (8th) but before the Netherlands (12th), France (17th) and Belgium (27th).  The European countries and in this case Scandinavian countries dominate the ranking. Finland, Sweden and Norway reached the podium. Egypt (58th), Kuwait (59th) and India (60th) were ranked last.
TheExpat Insider 2020report presents aranking of the best and worst host countriesfor expats who care about the environment and sustainability. The report is based on an opinion poll involving over15,000 expatsrepresenting173 nationalitiesand residing in 181 different countries.
Heaven for cyclists
Luxembourg's score is relatively balanced considering the poll's results. In any case, they represent the interpretations of foreign residents living in the Grand Duchy. In the light of thepoll's three main pillars, the Grand Duchy ranked10th for the criterion of the availability of green goods and services. Four out of five expats (80%) are positive about the country's energy supply, and 84% are satisfied with the waste management and recycling infrastructure. ​
Luxembourg also did well in thePeople and Politics subcategory (11th). 83% of those questioned indicate that the government supports policies for environmental protection. And the majority of expatriates (70%) also believe that the local population is concerned about environmental issues.
Even for theenvironmental qualitycriterion, Luxembourg is at the head of the pack, reaching the 13th position. ​ In the comments, one can read that a Belgian expat particularly likes "the green and lush landscape", and an American also emphasises "the access to nature for hiking and cycling" as an undeniable advantage of living in Luxembourg. All in all, 92% of respondents love Luxembourg's natural environment.
Moreover, almost nine expats out of 10 (89%) deem thequality of water and sanitationin Luxembourg to be most remarkable, while 78% of expats are satisfied with the air quality.
Last update12.08.2024
For more information
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Public holidays in Luxembourg
Mercer 2024 Cost of Living Survey
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/mercer-cost-of-living-survey-2024.html
Mercer 2024 Cost of Living Survey
Among 226 cities across five continents, Luxembourg ranked 47th in the 2024 Cost of Living Survey conducted by consultancy firm Mercer. Looking at the costs of essential items such as housing, food and clothing, the survey draws comparisons between different cities and provides insight into the expenses of life around the globe. But what does Luxembourg's rank mean?
In the top 25%
Although Luxembourg's rank onMercer's Cost of Living Surveyhas been fluctuating over the past decade, it has steadilyclimbed from 84th in 2019 to a peak of 47th in 2024.However, this upward trend for Luxembourg also reflects its increasing living expenses. In simple terms: a higher rank indicates a higher cost of living.Overall, European cities feature frequently among the most expensive places to live, occupying half of the top ten spots in 2024. Switzerland leads this trend with Zurich (3), Geneva (4), Basel (5) and Bern (6) securing the highest positions for European cities, followed by London (8), Copenhagen (11) and Vienna (24). Closer to Luxembourg's ranking are Dublin (41), The Hague (44), Düsseldorf (51) and Oslo (52).
Shaping Luxembourg's cost of living
Luxembourg's rise in the Mercer ranking is due to multiple factors reflecting a broader global trend. General inflation, exchange-rate fluctuations, economic growth, and housing costs typically drive up living expenses, and Luxembourg is no exception. Additionally, increased economic and geopolitical volatility, along with local conflicts and emergencies, have contributed to higher costs worldwide.
While these factors add to rising costs,housing remains a major driver in the cost-of-living ranking, particularly in more expensive cities. In the case of Luxembourg, the housing market shows a notable gap between supply and demand. Limited availability of housing, coupled with high rental costs, drive up the cost of living. As housing dynamics continue to evolve worldwide, so will their impact on cost-of-living trends, influencing talent attraction and retention and potentially placing additional strain on organisations with employees in high-cost areas.
High quality of living in Luxembourg
Luxembourg ranked 16th out of 241 in the2023 Quality of Living Survey by Mercer, making it one of the most appealing cities in Europe and worldwide. While cost of living is a significant factororganisations and employees increasingly prioritise safety and securityin today's evolving global landscape, marked by conflicts and tensions. Luxembourg addresses these needs effectively, while also offering solid infrastructure and excellent connectivity.
Where do other cities stand?
Our neighbours are in similar positions with Paris coming in at rank 29, closely followed by Berlin at rank 31 and Brussels at 37.
The five most expensive cities, maintaining their ranks from last year, are:
In top-ranked cities like Hong Kong, Singapore or Zurich, costly housing markets and elevated prices of goods and services contribute to the high living costs. On the opposite end,the most affordable citiesare Abuja (226), Lagos (225), Islamabad (224), Bishkek (223), and Karachi (222), where lower living costs are partly due to currency depreciations.
Regardingindex changes, Accra surged by 80 positions, likely due to inflation, reaching 98th place in 2024. Meanwhile, Lagos plummeted 178 ranks to 225, significantly influenced by currency devaluations.
Mercer's Cost of Living Survey
Mercer remains a leading provider of data on the cost of living for employees working abroad. To assist companies in calculating cost of living allowances,Mercer conducts comprehensive research worldwide, evaluating the comparative costs of more than 200 items, including housing, transportation, food, clothing, household goods, and entertainment.
The rankings illustrate how currency fluctuations, inflation, and other factors can impact the purchasing powerof expatriate employees. Multinational companies use Mercer for accurate and relevant data to determine cost of living allowances for their skilled professionals on international assignments.
Last update23.01.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's economy
Technological environment
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/jours-feries-legaux.html
Public holidays in Luxembourg
As in many European countries, a majority of public holidays in Luxembourg have their origins in Christian festivals.  But did you know that Luxembourg is currently the only EU member state to have declared Europe Day on 9th May a public holiday? Or that the Grand Duke's birthday, which is celebrated on 23rd June, actually is on 16th April? On this page, you'll find a complete list of all the public holidays in Luxembourg, for this and the next year.
Public holidays in Luxembourg
Without further delay, here are Luxembourg's legal public holidays. "Legal" in this context means that these days have been fixed by the law of 25 April 2019. ​ However, there are alsobank holidays, such as Good Friday and Christmas Eve afternoon.
Are you looking for information onschool holidays? You'll find them onGuichet.lu, Luxembourg's online administrative portal.
Last update05.01.2026
For more information
Fêtes et traditions
7 things you need to know when you're invited for dinner in Luxembourg
Work life balance: un concept équilibré pour une vie équilibrée
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/11-worklife-balance.html
Work life balance: a balanced concept for a well-balanced life
A video campaign from the Ministry of Equality between Women and Men shows that most company employees opt for a balanced share of work and personal life.
The principle of work life balance has prevailed over the past few years and seems to be gaining momentum. The reason why is that a growing number of employees try to reconcile professional and individual activity the best they can.
The ministry's campaign seems to confirm this trend and here are some of the first testimonies on the topic: for most people, work/family balance is an ideal compromise between working life and personal life. 'My wife and Ihavecut down our working time to 60 and 75% to spend more time with our family'. Someone else said: 'In my view, having a good working life and personal life balance means reconciling the two, reaching professional goals and finding the time to spend time with your family'.
Video messages and good practice can be found on the ministry's facebook, Instagram and Twitter accounts -@luxembourgmega- as well as on the thematic websiteactionspositives.lu
Family life remains a decisive factor
The Ministry's action that follows ' Actions positives ' (positive actions) is laid out asan interactive AdventCalendarwith 24 videosencouraging gender equality. Through these testimonies, that were published until 24 December 2021, employees as well as company executives have opted for flexible work solutions (reducing the working time, flexible work schedule, etc.) so as to better organise work and leisure. 'I worked a lot at the expense of my family life, that is why I decided to work part-time', explained a company executive in his testimony.
These 24 video messages that reflect personal experiences, show that this balance strengthens employees' motivation generally speaking. Men can get more involved in their family life and women can improve their participation on the employment market.
In this work life balance, businesses increasingly invest in management tools, in particular in flexible work solutions, with a view to making employees more productive, but also happier and more balanced. Both the employer and the employee bear the responsibility of striking and establishing an ideal balance between working life and personal life.
Positive Actions label
In our day and age, labour equality between men and women is a major issue in our society. Even though Luxembourg is well underway on the path towards an egalitarian society, gaps between genders persist in many areas. The Ministry of Equality between Women and Men is committed to advocating projects aimed towards this path, in order to reach perfect equality as quickly as possible. One of these projects consists of awarding the Positive Actions label to businesses who make a special effort to reach equality.
Around 80 businesses took part in the 6th edition of the label and 6 of them were nominated. The project is about reviewing the situation of men and women employed in businesses that launched many gender equality actions in the context of recruitment, salaries, promotions, training and working life/personal life balance.
The Positive Actions programme is based on a voluntary process that was put in place by businesses. It is based on an external assessment funded by the Ministry, through which areas for improvement can be identified. Support is then provided to help the establishment set up their individual action plan.
Dernière modification le19.10.2023
Qualité de vie et vivre-ensemble au Luxembourg
Discriminations: comprendre le phénomène et agir pour améliorer le vivre-ensemble interculturel
Niveau des salaires
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/wage-levels.html
Wage levels
With its thriving economy, attractive salaries and high level of well-being, Luxembourg is an alluring labour market, drawing thousands of newcomers to the country every year. At the same time, the minimum social wage and a unique indexation system help to maintain lasting social harmony in the Grand Duchy.
Attractive wages
Did you know that Luxembourg is atthe top of the list of OECD countries when it comes to average wage? At 80,913 dollars, Luxembourg is ahead of Iceland, ranked second, and Switzerland, ranked third.
In Luxembourg, the wage may under no circumstances be below theminimum wagethreshold, which is defined by two levels:
Luxembourg, European champion of equal pay
According toSTATECdata, Luxembourg has the lowest gender pay gap in Europe. Since 2021, the Grand Duchy has also been the only EU Member State where this indicator has shown a negative value. In other words, the average hourly wage for women (€30.72) is now higher than that for men (€30.50). In 2022, this gap in favour of women stood at -0.7%, a unique scenario in the EU, where the average remains at 12.7% in favour of men.
Cost of living and incomes in Luxembourg
The level ofdisposable household incomein Luxembourg has risen sharply. In 2023, this increase reached 4.6%, taking the average income toclose to 50,000 euros, placing the Grand Duchy in first place among OECD countries!Eurostatattests to the high materialwell-being of households, with thehighest purchasing power in the EU.
The financial burden associated with housing - which currently stands at 26,141 euros per year -represents the largest household expenditure. It is followed by costs related to transport and food, amounting to 9,807 euros and 6,870 euros respectively. Visit theStatistics Portalfor details on average annual expenditures per household.
The index - guardian of social peace
In order tomaintain purchasing power, Luxembourg has introduced anautomatic mechanism for indexing salaries to the cost of living.A new index bracket is applied when the half-yearly average of the consumer price index exceeds the previous reference by 2.5%. This index is calculated from a basket of almost 7,700 prices for goods and services collected by STATEC surveyors, plus 90,000 additional data from checkouts at various supermarkets. When a new tranche is triggered,all wages, salaries and pensions are automatically adjusted by 2.5%.This mechanism helps to uphold stable social harmony in the Grand Duchy!
How does inflation affect us and why is that? STATEC explains all there is to know about inflation. (Video/Audio YouTube)
Inflation & automatic wage indexation
News
Last update29.01.2025
Luxembourg's workforce
Languages at work: French prevails
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life/discrimination.html
Discrimination: understanding the phenomenon and taking action to improve intercultural living together
Any discrimination based on race or ethnic origin, gender, sexual orientation, religion or beliefs, disability, age or nationality is prohibited by law. Nevertheless, many people still suffer from discrimination due to deep-rooted stereotypes in our societies.  Whether you are a victim or witness of discrimination, in Luxembourg you can count on various institutions and associations for support.
Types of discrimination
In order to assert your rights if you think you have been the target of discrimination, or to report a case of discrimination that you have witnessed, here are some basic concepts established in law, gathered by theCentre for Equal Treatment (Centre pour l'égalité de traitement, CET).
Discrimination can be based on any ofseven grounds, namely:
Discrimination can be direct or indirect:
Harassmentis also considered as aform of discrimination.Harassment occurs when undesirable behaviour linked to one of the reasons for discriminationhas the aim or effectofcompromising a person's dignity and creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment.
Organisations involved in preventing and tackling discrimination
TheCentre for Equal Treatment (Centre pour l'égalité de traitement, CET)is the body that was established by the Law of 28th November 2006 on Equal Treatment to promote, analyse and monitor equal treatment among all individuals. The Centre deals with all the areas covered by the law except for discrimination based on nationality.
In the exercise of its mission, the Centre publishes reports and issues opinions and recommendations, and it offersassistance to people who believe that they have been the target of discrimination. To this end, it provides anadvice and guidance serviceto inform people about their rights and how to exercise them.
Contact the Centre for Equal Treatment
By post: 65, route d'Arlon, L-1140 Luxembourg
Telephone: (+352) 28 37 36 35
Email:info@cet.lu
There are also other associations that provide information and support to help tackle all types of discrimination or provide insight into specific areas. Some of these associations havereceived ministerial accreditation, which enables them to bring or pursue legal action, thereby assisting victims before the courts:
In the field ofwork and employment, staff delegations, trade unions, theLabour and Mines Inspectorate (Inspection du Travail et des Mines)and thePsychosocial Service of the Civil Service (Service psychosocial de la fonction publique)are also there to listen and can support victims and witnesses. Also, theLuxembourg Association against Moral Harassment and Stress at Work (Association luxembourgeoise contre le harcèlement moral et le stress au travail) (Mobbing)offers psychological support.
Other organisations and associationssupport victims and witnesses in a more informative and educational manner.Please checkthe list provided by the CET on its websiteto find the most suitable contact person.
The reference partner ministries areMinistry of Family Affairs, Solidarity, Living Together and Reception of Refugees, theMinistry for Gender Equality and Diversity, theMinistry of Stateand theMinistry of Justice.
Age is also a form of discrimination
Often overlooked, age discrimination can affect both children and the elderly. If you experience this type of discrimination, there are various institutions and associations that can help you, such as:
Measures to tackle discrimination and promote diversity
The measures taken by the main stakeholders and experts to tackle discrimination focus mainly on promoting intercultural co-existence, raising awareness to combat stereotypes and making it easier to report cases of discrimination.
TheLoi relative au vivre-ensemble interculturel(Law on intercultural living together)was passed in July 2023. It marks a paradigm shift, replacing the old "integration" approach with a broader, more open approach to "intercultural living together".Tackling racism and all forms of discrimination at municipal level is a key cross-cutting featurein all the measures and organisations introduced by the legislation. Theintercultural living together portal(Zesummeliewen)centralises the information, as well as two key initiatives in this innovative approach: theBiergerpakt(citizens' pact) and theGemengepakt(municipal pact). Whether you're a Luxembourgish, non-Luxembourgish or a cross-border worker, you can play an active role in promoting intercultural co-existence in Luxembourg.
Whistleblowers are protected by law
In Luxembourg, whistleblowers are protected by the Law of 16th May 2023. The law applies towhistleblowers working in the private or public sector who have obtained information about work-related violations.Whistleblowers can contact:
Whistleblower - Ministry of Justice (Video/Audio YouTube)
Sexism - Council of Europe (Video/Audio)
The campaignStop sexism. See it. Name it. Stop itaims to tacklegender-based discrimination, which mainly affectswomen and girls. Sexism occurs in all areas of life, including language and communication, media, the workplace, justice, education, sport and the private sphere. The campaign website presentsmeasuresto tackle stereotypes and a list ofcontacts that can offer help.
This campaign led by the Ministry for Gender Equality and Diversity comes within the broader framework of theCouncil of Europe recommendation on preventing and combating sexism.
TheDiversity Charter Lëtzebuergis another instrument that links public and private partners. It is a declaration of national commitment that is available to organisations that want to commit topromoting and managing diversity by means of specific measures that go beyond legal obligations. The challenge of diversity involves making sure that everyone has employment and career possibilities in line with their skills and ambitions and that their individual characteristics are respected (sex, race, age, ethnic and social origins, beliefs, etc.). The Charter was introduced more than a decade ago and it now has over 325 signatories. Partners'best practicescan be consulted on the website.
Last update25.02.2026
For more information
Une population ouverte et cosmopolite
Work life balance: un concept équilibré pour une vie équilibrée
Égalité des chances
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/top-5-velo-luxembourg-bike.html
Top 5: why it's good to live by bike in Luxembourg
Welcome to the land of Charly Gaul and the Schleck brothers! These cyclists and their legendary races have attracted the world's attention and left their mark on the history of Luxembourgish cycling. However, cycling in Luxembourg is not just about sport, it is also beating heart of the country's soft mobility initiative. A proactive and pro-cycling policy has led to the development of various facilities and initiatives in different parts of the Grand Duchy. An overview.
600 km of cycle paths
Cycling and Luxembourg – a match made in heaven! The legendsCharly Gaul, François Faber, the Schleck brothersand many other iconic heroes to have graced the saddle have successfully steered Luxembourg to the summit of the cycling world. But cycling in the Grand Duchy is not just the domain of professional cyclists.
Thanks to a proactive and pro-cycling policy, Luxembourg now boasts ahighly developed and modern cycling network. There are 600 kilometres of cycle paths and 700 kilometres of mountain bike tracks set among the beautiful and diverse landscape. In fact, the Grand Duchy is a true paradise for cyclists, full of picturesque routes meandering through the historic villages in the Ardennes, scenic woodland, the steep valleys and the green hills of this natural wonderland in the north of the country.
Whether you are a professional sportsperson or a cycling enthusiast, these routes cater for all levels of difficulty. And if you no longer have the energy to cycle up the hills, just take a detour along the winding paths of theMoselle. A picturesque backdrop worthy of the most beautiful postcards will be your reward for taking the longer but equally scenic route!
Once you have cycled past the vineyards, the path continues towards the south of the country, where Luxembourg's historical legacy was forged and where today, in the bowels of theLand of the Red Rocks, the most vertiginous trails for mountain bikers can be found. In the "Iron Metropolis", on the cycle path, you will also discover the longest bicycle bridge in Europe, which was opened in December 2022. At last, a mini motorway just for bicycles, allowing you to pedal quietly, away from the traffic between Esch-sur-Alzette and Belval.
Luxembourg by bike is a journey full of surprises...
Bed & bike
Luxembourg is a popular destination for cycling tourists from all over the world and offers cycle paths to suit all levels. And for those embarking on a longer journey by bike, it's important to find somewhere to sleep at night. The Grand Duchy offers several options: a wide range of campsites, hotels, gîtes, estates, guesthouses and inns offer ideal accommodation for cyclists. Thebed+bike labelensures that cyclists are welcomed in the best conditions.
This label was introduced in Luxembourg by the Ministry of Tourism in cooperation with LVI (Lëtzebuerger Vëlos-Initiativ) in 2011. From luxury hotels to family-run guesthouses, thebed+bikelabel certifies the quality of service offered by approximately95 establishments.
Luxembourg by bike is a journey full of surprises...
Bicycles in the city - a success story
After completing a tour of the countryside, it's off to the city, where cycling is becoming more and more popular. Last year, the city of Luxembourg registeredmore than one million bicycle journeys, thanks to ground sensors placed at very specific locations.This figure has increased by 36%compared to the previous year, according to the ProVelo association. Many people now ride to the office, while others use their bikes to go shopping or on excursions. There is also evidence that more and more families are using a cargo bike to take their children to school.
It is clear that the bicycle has become extremely popular with residents and therefore the city authorities continue to invest in cycling to make it as accessible as possible. Hence, numerous facilities for cyclists have sprung up in the various districts of the capital.
This includes thebicycle network, which has been extended by seven new streets in 2022, theM-Box, the secure spaces available to protect your bike against vandalism, thebike parkingand, of course, the 24/7self-service bike hireservice.
TheVel'ohbicycle service in Luxembourg city was launched in 2008 and now has145 stations with 1,157 bicycles,89 of which are in the capital. Self-service soft mobility is also available in Esch-sur-Alzette, the second largest city in the Grand Duchy. In this town, the system is called Vel'ok and is offered free of charge at about forty stations in the City of Esch alone. Throughout the wholeVel'okzone, which consists of nine neighbouring municipalities, this figure exceeds 120 units.
Luxembourg by bike is a journey full of surprises...
Bicycle subsidy
Residents are actively encouraged to use bicycles in Luxembourg, as proven by the State aid granted for this soft mode of transport. Nurturing the culture of cycling is clearly one of the country's main objectives, alongside reducing the environmental impact and reducing CO2 emissions of daily travel.
Moreover, the incentives are particularly attractive when you buy an electric bicycle. However, these subsidies are no longer available to everyone. You are only entitled to the subsidy if the household receivesthe cost‑of‑living allowance or the energy premium. The subsidy corresponds to 50% of the bike’s total price including VAT, capped at 600 euros. This subsidy can be granted only once every five years per person. There are no restrictions with regard to the place of purchase of the bicycle or pedelec25, i.e. it can be purchased in Luxembourg, abroad or on the internet.
Vëlosummer
During the summer, cycling enthusiasts are encouraged to get on their bikes for theVëlosummer. During this event, the organisers offera dozen routescoveringapproximately 500 km. This initiative gives the whole family the opportunity to hop on their bikes and embark on a journey that combines nature, cultural attractions and the chance to savour local products.
Every year, the municipalities taking part and the five regional tourist offices (RTOs) contribute to the event's tourism framework programme by offering activities along the routes. Local cycling clubs organise barbecues, creating a festive atmosphere on the different circuits.
The Vëlosummer is therefore an ideal opportunity to find out more about restaurants, accommodation, tourist sites and bicycle hire in the different regions.
Another key event for cyclists is theAlles op de Velo, initiative organised by the Mouvement écologique and the municipalities of Mamer, Kopstal and Mersch. On this day dedicated solely to cycling, young and old alike have the chance to ride through the Mamer valley... without any traffic!
Luxembourg by bike is a journey full of surprises...
Last update26.03.2026
For more information
Public transport
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Carsharing
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/carsharing.html
Carsharing
Have you ever used a carsharing service? This system allows you to book a car whenever you wish, for the time of a drive. In Luxembourg, two operators, Carloh and Flex, represent the market with stations almost everywhere in the country. Now operational, a national strategy shows the government's will to incorporate this system in the National Mobility Plan, for everyone's convenience and throughout Luxembourg.
An expanding carsharing network
With Flex and Carloh, there are two systems in place thatencourage their customers to book a car when they need it and to give up using their own car. The benefit for companies and households is clear, especially in urban areas: rather share a car than pay a lot of money for the maintenance and the parking of a private car.
It is therefore no surprise thatCarlohis managed by the City of Luxembourg, the country's largest urban centre. Although the19 stations are all located in the territory of the city, the cars can be used far beyond the city limits.
However, the City of Luxembourg has developed amultimodal network that already allows customers to get to their destination by using soft mobility: buses, trams, cycling infrastructures and a bike rental service calledvel'OHseduce the city's residents and visitors, as shown by statistics.
The managers refer especially to theneeds of residents and small companies, for whom the car remains an important and flexible means of mobility – when needed. For the rest, the car stays put and is expensive, while it is taking up space. This is where carsharing comes in: renting instead of buying is the motto. The rental service therefore makes it possibleto reduce the fleet of vehicles in the urban centre, using ecological and economic argumentsthat persuade customers: 200 and 300 trips per week are already being made, a clear success, given that the Carloh service was only launched in 2014.
What is carsharing?
Carsharingis a service that allows you to book a vehicle, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for a short period of time and then to hand it over to the next customer. The cars are situated in reserved parking spaces especially provided for this purpose and can be parked there after use, thus avoiding parking fees.
An essential part of mobility in Luxembourg
The ecological and economic argument also guides the thoughts ofFlex's managers. This is a company established by National Association of Luxembourg Railways (CFL) which operates a fleet of vehicles available in 60 stations throughout the country, with a distinct concentration in the centre and in the southwest.
Although a significant number of stations are located next to railway stations, others have been set up in collaboration with municipalities in urban centres. The objective is clear:to offer alternatives to the public where they are needed, throughout Luxembourg.
Thus, carsharing is rapidly establishing itself as an importantpart of the multimodal mobility network planned by theNational Mobility Plan, Modu2035. As mentioned in the title, the plan aims to change habits on our roads, including individual mobility, by 2035. Except for the planned increase in public transportation, the new regulations are mainly aimed atreducing individual traffic, i.e. repetitive short journeyssuch as a round trips to work or school. Carsharing is therefore a part of the efforts to reduce the density of car traffic and the fleet of vehicles, where possible. It is important to know that a carsharing vehicle can replace up to 10 individual cars.
The establishment ofMobility Hubs
Consistent use of this mobility option therefore allows companies and private households to remain flexible, while saving the costs related to the maintenance of a car.
In order to promote this mode of transport, the Ministry of Mobility and Public Works, author of the National Mobility Strategy and Plan, is promoting the installation ofcarsharing stations inMobility Hubs, which provide a range of mobility-related services. The objective is clear: to provide residents, cross-border commuters and visitors with several options concerning their mobility in a single place, in order tomake the use of individual means of transport redundant.
Together with other mobility components in Luxembourg, such as the free public transport network and the expanding cycling network,carsharing will completely change the way we travel tomorrow.
Last update18.06.2025
For more information
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Public transport
Mobility for cross-border workers
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/cross-border-mobility.html
Mobility for cross-border workers
People who commute daily from France, Germany or Belgium to work in Luxembourg are increasingly benefiting from a well-developed public transport network. At present, 38 cross-border bus and rail lines connect neighbouring regions with Luxembourg. The system is further supported by numerous Park & Ride facilities and a fleet of modern electric buses. Together, these measures make commuting not only easier, but also more sustainable. They encourage people to switch from cars to public transport, helping them save time and money while also reducing emissions.
38 cross-border bus routes
In Luxembourg, cross-border public transport is playing an increasingly important role in everyday life.With a population of around 700,000, Luxembourg is one of the most densely populated regions in Europe.Each day, a further 230,000 people commute here from neighbouring countries– including many employees of businesses based near the border. The creation of cross-border bus routes to complement the domestic network is therefore a necessity – something that is also reflected in the pace of expansion.
There are currently 38 bus lines that operate across the borders:
These routes areseamlessly integrated into Luxembourg’s domestic network and, since 2020, passengers have been able to travel on them free of charge up to the border.Beyond that point, the fares of the respective network operator apply. The only exception isroute 502 toRoussy-le-Village– a pilot project launched by the Ministry to promote the use of public transport among French cross-border workers.
Train and Park & Ride – an efficient combination
Trains operatetoArlon(B),Gouvy(B),Volmerange(F),Audun-le-Tiche(F),Longwy(F),Nancy(F) andTrier(D).
On the Luxembourg side, as well as in neighbouring border regions, Park & Ride facilities are being gradually expanded to make public transport an even more attractive option. The following services are currently aimed at cross-border workers in particular:
Additional Park & Ride options are available on the national territory.
Apps to help you plan your journey
Users of theCFL appwho are travelling at least 1.5 km from the car park can useCFL-operated Park & Ride facilities free of charge.
Want up-to-date timetables at your fingertips? TheMobilitéit.lu app(forAndroidandApple)  gives you easy access to live departure info and lets you track buses in real time.
Driving economic and sustainable growth through mobility
An efficient public transport network is crucial to Luxembourg’s development. It supports not only thewellbeing of residents and public transport users, but also the country’s economic growth and its efforts to reduce domestic CO2 emissions.
Since the introduction of free public transport, usage has risen significantly. For example, 31.7 million people travelled by tram and 31.3 million by train in 2024. This is hugely boosting the expansion of the public transport network, including large-scale projects such as the extension of rail connections towards France and the construction of new tram lines in the capital. In addition, an express link between Esch-sur-Alzette and Luxembourg City is being considered.
Electrifying the bus fleet is currently also high on the agenda. In 2024, 98% of newly registered buses were electric.
None of this is happening by chance.A reliable transport system is essential for ensuring people can get to work easily and on time.It also encourages more people to leave their car at home and use public transport instead. After all, fewer cars on the road means lower greenhouse gas emissions in the Grand Duchy. Currently, mobility still accounts for 26% of Luxembourg’s CO2 emissions. Although this figure is decreasing.
Overall, the efforts are aimed at keepingLuxembourg attractive to cross-border workers from neighbouring regions and avoiding mobility from collapsing. Together with other initiatives, such as theexpansion of the cycling network,they arepaving the way for a sustainable future.
Did you know?
90.9% of train journeys in Luxembourg run on time. The main exception is the line between Luxembourg City,Thionville(F) and Metz (F): passenger numbers doubled between 2005 and 2023, leading to chronic overcrowding. This line is now being upgraded and is due toreopen in 2028 with a fully modernised infrastructure and 50% more capacity.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Public transport
5 key pointers for cross-border workers in Luxembourg
Mobility
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/by-plane.html
By plane
Findel is Luxembourg's only commercial airport. Located a few miles outside the centre of Luxembourg City, it is an important hub for continental flights as well as international cargo transportation and storage. Did you know for example that the world's leading all-cargo airline, Cargolux, is based in Luxembourg? Located next to the airport’s cargo centre, Le FREEPORT Luxembourg is amulti-service platform dedicated to the storage, handling and trading of valuable goods(e.g. artworks, fine wines, precious metals and collectible items).
Luxembourg-Findel - a modern airport
For many years, an increase in air traffic was recorded in terms of general aviation at Luxembourg Airport. And for good reason:the Grand Duchy's only terminal lies in the very heart of the Greater Regionand is very popular with both residents and users from neighbouring countries. With a number of passengers that has kept rising each year, Luxembourg's international airport - commonly referred to as Findel - is in full expansion. No less than 4.04 million passengers used the Findel's air lanes in 2018, against 3.5 million in 2017 and 3.02 million in 2016. Inaugurated in 2008, the new terminal is very modern and the new 450 m2 structure welcomes customers and their crews in an optimal environment with top-of-the-range services.
A entails B...
Terminal B only accommodates small aircraft from or to the Schengen area. These flights  represent 55 to 65% of Findel airport's total air traffic, and around 40% of them travel through the B terminal.
The 'small aircraft' terminal was developed in the form of a satellite, and can be accessed through the A terminal. Once passengers and their luggage have been checked in the A terminal, and after boarding pass control, they go to the B terminal through a moving walkway that is 108m long, offering an interesting view of what is happening on the airport tarmac.
Overall, the B terminal  has 10 gates  for departures and 6 for arrivals. It features 246 waiting seats.
Facts and figures
Getting to the airport
1.   Transport
2.   Parking
It is easy and convenient to park at Luxembourg Airport. Drivers can choose from various car parks, the rates and distance from the terminal vary. The car parks can be accessed without prior booking. At the airport entrance, displays tell you how many spaces are available in each car park.
More detailed information is available on the website of Lux-Airport ('Access & Parking').
Air passengers' rights
Having trouble during your journey? Luxembourg applies many European regulations on passengers' rights.
Find out more on one of these websites:
Air security and safety
The Directorate of Civil Aviation (DAC), in its capacity as national regulatory and supervisory authority, is responsible for supervising the safety and security of civil aviation activities and is competent for licences, certificates, approvals, approvals etc. required by applicable laws or regulations.
Some useful information on air security and safety for travellers:
Last update13.03.2026
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Public transport
Getting around by car
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/public-transport.html
Public transport
Public transport is a fast, clean and free way of getting about in Luxembourg. Yes, you heard it right: it's free! Since 2020, all modes of public transport - buses, trains and the tram - have been free of charge throughout Luxembourg. And with a network that is constantly adapting to the passengers' needs and the addition of the tram, this form of transport is increasingly popular with residents and visitors alike.
All networks are free
Since 29 February 2020, public transport has beenfree for everybody, residents as well as tourists. This is the case for trains, trams and buses (RGTR, TICE, AVL). In other words, youdon't need to buy a ticket anymore. The only exception are tickets and subscriptions for the 1st class, which still have to be paid for. A fee will be charged at the applicable rates.
However, all passengers must be able to show a personal identity document at any time if requested by the conductor.
From the city to the countryside by bus, train and tram
Luxembourg offersan interconnected network of buses, trains andtrams that allows you to access any destination smoothly. Indeed, even though the urban centres, such as Luxembourg City and the agglomerations in the north and south of the country are very well linked, therural regions also benefit from a guaranteed service, during the week as well as on weekends.Transport connections can easily belooked up via theMobiliteit.lu app (App StoreorGoogle Play Store) or via thewebsite.
Luxembourg also benefits fromgood cross-border connections, with direct access to the German, French and Belgian networks. Thus, the German high-speed train ICE, as well as the French TGV meet up in Luxembourg City and allow transit in all comfort. To synchronise your cross-border travels, go toMobiregio, the Greater Region's platform.
A comprehensive range of services
You can also use theCityBus to get around the towns and villages, and return home safe and sound after one or more beers on theNight Bus or the Night Rider, which run at weekends. A number of municipalities also offer an on-call bus service (Ruffbus) which picks you up from your home. The relevant local authority can provide more information on the services offered.
People with a disability can also use theAdapto-service, a taxi-bus with door-to-door service. Indeed, amajor emphasis is placed on the accessibility of public transport in Luxembourg. Together with experts, the Verkéiersverbond has worked out a series of tools which guarantee that people with visual or aural impairments have access to all the information and timetables. Moreover, we also work to achieve barrier-free transportation for mobility-impaired people.
Train and bike? Not a problem here in Luxembourg! You can takeyour bicycle with you on trains free of charge(subject to the availability of seats). And what if you would like to leave your bike at the train station? No problem: thebikeboxnetwork allows you todrop your bike off at the train station and leave it parked safely until you return.
Do you want to go abroad?
Luxembourg isvery well integrated into the international rail network. Departures to Trier, Metz and Brussels every hour and to Liège every two hours. A weekend in Paris? The City of Lights is only two hours away on the high-speed train (TGV, in French)! Check out thetimetable on the website of the Luxembourg Railway Companyfor more information.
Last update22.07.2025
For more information
Getting around by car
By plane
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/getting-around-by-car.html
Getting around by car
The car remains one of the pillars of mobility in Luxembourg. However, in order to face the challenges posed by climate change and to safeguard quality of life for future generations, much is being done to offer alternatives to cars and make motorised traffic more environmentally friendly. Read this page for information about driving in Luxembourg, car-sharing and the rapidly expanding network of electric charging stations.
Travelling by car in Luxembourg
The Grand Duchy boasts adense network of well-maintained roads, bridges and tunnels that is very well-connected to the neighbouring countries. Indeed, most of Luxembourg's motorways lead over the borders, towardsTrierand Cologne (A1), Thionville, Metz and Strasbourg (A3),Brussels (A6) andSaarbrücken(A13).
Statistics put the Grand Duchynear the top of the list of countries for the number of cars in relation to the population. In fact the number of cars in Luxembourg has reached 415,002 in 2019, compared to 403,115 in 2018. At the same time,the part of verhicles with electric or hybrid propulsion is rapidly growingand nearly doubled between 2020 and 2021.
To drive a vehicle in the Grand Duchy, the following are compulsory:
For more information on the formalities to drive in Luxembourg, or how to register your vehicle,check the relevant pages on Guichet.lu, Luxembourg's online administrative portal.
What you need to know about driving licences
Anyone wishing to drive a vehicle must be in possession of a driving licence valid for the category of vehicle being used. The points system for driving licences was set up in the Grand Duchy in 2002.
To drive with a motor vehicle on the Grand Duchy's public roads, you imperatively need a driving licence that is valid for that category of vehicle. The Driving Licence Department of theNational Society of Automobile Traffic(Société nationale de circulation automobile, SNCA) handles everything connected with driving licences, except for matters involving the points system, disputes, and medical issues.
Obtaining a driving licence
To obtain a driving licence in the Grand Duchy, candidates must:
Foreign licenses in Luxembourg
If you arrive in Luxembourg and have a foreign driving licence, don't worry! Thestandard European driving licence was introduced in the Grand Duchy in January 2013. Licences issued by an European Union (EU) or European Economic Area (EEA) member state are recognised in Luxembourg. As a result, such holders do not need to exchange or get a re-transcription of their licence. However, if they wish to exchange it or get a re-transcription thereof, thefollowingsteps are required:
Hang on to your points
Upon obtaining a driving licence,you have12 points that can be taken away for more serious driving offences. Once all the points have been lost, the licence is no longer valid and has to be renewed.
Car-pooling: connected hitch-hiking
Are you a commuter looking for car-pooling opportunities in order to get to work?
Car-pooling is a collective means of transport and atrend that is developing slowly but surely on the roads of the Grand Duchy.
Car-pooling is highly valued by cross-border workers who are even more exposed to never-ending congestion when commuting. It allows people to make savings (on fuel and parking) and limit their ecological impact, but can also be seen as a means of strengthening social ties while contributing to convivial times on the way.
In an effort to promote carsharing, the Ministry of Mobility and Public Works published its owncarsharing app: Copilote.lu. Information about it is available on its website, as well as via the mobile applications for itunes and Google Play.
Carsharing: ultimate flexibility
In the context of shared mobility, carsharing is a form of vehicle rental whereby users share cars without being car owners. They canrent the vehicle at any time they want and park it after use.
Two carsharing services currently exist in Luxembourg:
Last update11.11.2024
For more information
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Public transport
By plane
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/by-bicycle.html
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Would you like to explore the Grand Duchy in search of unusual places? Are you a fan ofSlow Tourism? Do you want to limit your environmental footprint by using soft mobility? Luxembourg offers a comprehensive range of services and initiatives to help you explore the local regions by bike. These options include an ever-increasing network of cycle paths, attractive rental offers and a multimodal mobility initiative.
Multimodal mobility - cycle anywhere, anytime
"Multimodal" has been a cornerstone of Luxembourg's mobility concept. Free public transport has grown in popularity, with an increasing emphasis on allowing people to switch from one mode of transport to another.
Many railway stations offerbikeboxes, secure boxes for bike storage. If you have an access card (available for free here), you can leave your bike while you take the train to your workplace. You can pick it up anytime you want.
Furthermore, the network has been adapted so that you can take your bike with you.The carriages on national trains have spaces reserved for bicycles. This option is particularly popular with many tourists who want to explore the country from behind their handlebars.
Also, the cities ofLuxembourg andEsch-sur-Alzette, as well as the Moselle region, offer 24/7 bicycle rental servicesthat use electric bikes, so you can get around without getting tired - more details below.
Cycling paths - promoting slow tourism
Whether nestled in nature, along old railway tracks, on small trails at the foot of an ancient castle or along a river, Luxembourg's cycle paths are as varied as they are impressive.
TheGrand Duchy currently has a network of 600km of cycling paths, which should reach around 900km by 2028.
Aseries of cycling "expressways" link the country's regions. Thisgroup of 23 cycle pathsis expanding rapidly and developing into a dense grid that will facilitate and accelerate travel throughout the country. Additionally, aseries of local and regional cycling pathsallow you to leave the urban areas and explore the hidden beauty of our country.
You can even get lost in the country, albeit in a good (and luxurious) way! TheBed+Bikelabellists a large number of participating hotels and hostels that are fully adapted to cyclists. These establishments offer a range of services tailored to bicycles, including secure bike storage, repair and maintenance kits, specific information for cyclists and meals to help you conquer the next stage of your journey.
Is too much luggage weighing you down? Don't worry, we have a solution.Just register withMoveWeCarry.luand leave your suitcases at your accommodation.The national railway company CFL will collect your bags and deliver them to your next stop. You'll have clean clothes waiting for you when you arrive at your next destination.
Bicycle rental – a fast and easy service
Bicycle rental services are available in selected regions, and the cities of Luxembourg and Esch-sur-Alzette have an operational self-service rental bike system:
The Vëlosummer – for the pleasure of cycling
TheVëlosummer(summer of cycling) brings together cycling enthusiasts for the duration of a summer. For every edition,a number of regional circular routes are created, with varying degrees of difficulty, for the joy of families and experienced cyclists alike. For several weekends, roads will even be closed to motorised traffic in order to provide a unique, unrestricted cycling experience. This event not only offers the ideal opportunity to hop on your bike, but it also allows you to explore Luxembourg and appreciate its diverse landscape and friendly people.
Vëlosummer 2024 (Video/Audio)
Last update18.03.2026
For more information
Public transport
Discover Luxembourg by bike
Getting around by car
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/settling-in/where-to-live-in-luxembourg.html
Where to live in Luxembourg?
When you move to a new place, real estate is not going to be the only thing on your mind. You may consider moving to a place from which you can bike to your workplace. You may want to live close to a public transportation hub. You may want to enjoy the comforts of having culture, education and leisure infrastructures nearby, or seek peace and quiet somewhere in a rural setting. Whatever you are looking for, you will most certainly find your perfect spot in Luxembourg because, as small as the country may be, as diverse are the environments that you are going to encounter.
Getting around is easier than you think
In a country withover 600,000 inhabitants and 200,000 cross-border commuters, mobility is key. While many enjoy living in one of Luxembourg’s urban centres –Luxembourg City,Esch-Alzetteand the 'Northern City' encompassingEttelbruckandDiekirch, which are the country’s economic hotspots – getting to those centres from outside is not a problem either.
Although traffic jams are a topic during rush hour, efforts to incite people to renounce going by car are starting to bear fruit, fueled by thefree public transportation systemand therapidly expanding network ofbicycle lanes.Parking in the urban centres can be expensive, rising up to €28 a day in certain car parks in Luxembourg City.
Carsharing servicesare one alternative avoid expensive parking fees. 2 operators offer their services in the country and have been enjoying some success.
Public transportation is especially dense on the main roads linking the urban centres and the axis that run towards Belgium, Germany. In Luxembourg City, thetram network is being continually extended, which will make travelling within the city much easier.
Mobiliteit.lu - timetables at your fingertips
If you want a maximum of flexibility but don’t want to take your car into one of these urban centres,many towns have so called 'mobility hubs', where it's easy to leave your car and continue by train or bus. For cyclists, there are also thebikeboxes at key locations, secured boxes to store your bike while you are away.
In the countryside, the versatility of a car is definitely an advantage though, to drive kids to their after-school activities, pick up groceries or travel on weekends, when less buses and trains run. Most big infrastructures are within a 10-20 minute drive, although this may increase in the northern part of the country, which is less densely populated.
Quality of life
Luxembourg enjoys a high quality of life, somethingmajor rankingsregularly confirm.
Thesouthern sprawl in theMinettregion with Esch-Alzetteenjoys many parks and recreation areas(e.g. theGaalgebiergand theGiele Botternature reserve) surrounding the busy city centres. AndLuxembourg City's many parks, playgrounds and quiet suburbs make you forget in an instant that you are actually in a European capital. These urban centres also host the larger cultural, sports, leisure and administrative infrastructures, but smaller infrastructures throughout the country are just as diverse.
Luxembourg's rural areas are very idyllic and very easy to reach from the urban centres. The forests and fields around them are popular hiking and biking areas, especially in the summer.Associative lifeis given a lot of importance in the villages, and joining a band or sports club is the best way to integrate quickly and meet new people. The event calendar in even the most rural communities is usually brimming with concerts, art exhibitions, sports events, etc., so make sure to check it out.
Echo.lu - Luxembourg's event calendar
Sports, culture and health
Sports infrastructures, e.g. swimming pools and stadiums, are many. Although the main infrastructures are located in or near Luxembourg City, i.e. the national stadium and the national aquatic centre 'D'Coque', every municipality has its own local infrastructures.
As for culture, themain infrastructureswill again be located in or near Luxembourg City, such as the National Library, many national museums and the Philharmonie concert hall, or in Esch-Alzette, such as theRockhal, theKulturfabrikor the National Audiovisual Centre. However,many decentralised culture hotspots cater to all kinds of tastes, with local museums, concert halls and art festival having long exited the shadow of the large national institutions and events.Wiltz,Echternach,Niederanven,Marnach,Grevenmacher,Clervauxand of course Esch-Alzettehave a bustling artistic scene and are well known beyond the country's borders for their museums, concerts and festivals.
Need regular healthcare?Luxembourg's hospitals are concentrated in and around Luxembourg City:
Alongside these general hospitals, there is also a number of specialist hospitals.
Moreover, the GPs in Luxembourg ensure a 24/7 on-call service in so called 'Maisons médicales'. These medical health centres are open during the night, on weekends and on holidays. They are located in Luxembourg City, Esch-AlzetteandEttelbruck.
Real estate prices on the rise
Real estate prices for Luxembourg City are nearly on par with cities such as Paris or Munich(2021: 13,000€/m2). Especially boroughs such asWeimerskirch,Belair,Limpertsberg,Kirchberg,PfaffenthalandGasperichhave seen prices for flats rocket.Recent government programmes seek to counter this evolution with large-scale housing construction, but owning real estate remains expensive in the capital.
Elsewhere, prices have been rising too, especially in the vicinity of the capital and the main roads leading to it. Accord to theHousing Observatory, the municipalities ofBertrange,Kopstal,Mamer,StrassenandHesperangealong the western axis,Sandweiler,NiederanvenandConternalong the eastern axis andSteinsel,WalferdangeandLorentzweileralong the northern axis have the highest prices for apartments and houses.
Lower prices are usually associated with the regions furthest from the capital, i.e. in the Luxembourg Ardennes region, commonly calledEislek, which is more sparsely populated and has less dense infrastructure.
Geoportail.lu - customise maps of Luxembourg
Putting children first: Education and childcare
Childcare facilitiesoperate for younger and older childrenall throughout the country. Every child between 0 and 4 years has aguaranteed spot in a day- or childcare facility in Luxembourg.
Most municipalities have centralised education facilities forpreschool and fundamental education. A locally organised bus service brings the kids to school and back to their villages or community free of charge.
Secondary schoolsare located in the country's main cities and towns. Luxembourg City alone has 11 state run institutes of secondary education, plus three private schools and 5 international schools. Esch-Alzettefollows with three state-run schools, one private school and one international school. However, alarge number of secondary schools exist in the rest of the country, including the well-known European School in Luxembourg-KirchbergandMamer.
Anumber ofhigher education institutionsalso operate in the country– see our page about higher education institutions in Luxembourg for more information.
Last update13.08.2024
For more information
Education
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/settling-in/luxembourg-networks-connected.html
Staying connected
Luxembourg has heavily invested into its infrastructures, mobile and fixed, and it shows. 4G and broadband everywhere allow for fast internet connections, as 5G and fibre optics networks are spreading rapidly. Luxembourg is already one of the countries with the best connectivity in Europe, which is regularly confirmed in all major rankings.
Mobile life
Luxembourg enjoys anexcellent connectivity for mobile devices.
Mobile networks cover close to 100% of Luxembourg’s territory, with4G or 4G+ being available in all areas covered. Urban areas are very well connected, while some hilly woodland areas in the north might have a less good connectivity.Since 2020, a number of areas in Luxembourg have been equipped with5G technology, with more areas about to follow suit.
Public WiFi networks areavailable in many Luxembourgish cities, among others in Luxembourg’s two major cities Luxembourg City and Esch-sur-Alzette. In order to gain access, you will have to register. However, their basic use is free of charge. Many cafes, restaurants and other places also have free Wifi for customers. Most of the time, these networks will be password-protected, so make sure to ask for access.
Landlines, television and internet
Luxembourg’sfixed network do not only enjoy high connection speeds, thanks to the top quality infrastructures, but theirextension and improvement are priorities of government effortsin the field.
Landlines can be analogue or digital (ISDN), the latter allowing to operate multiple telephone numbers on the same line.All infrastructures are owned by Post Luxembourg. That means that, when you have booked the services of an operator, they will contact Post Luxembourg for the line to be opened, which can take up to one month.
Broadband is available everywhere in Luxembourg, with mean download speeds of 118.05 Mbps, which makes Luxembourg the5th best connected country in Europe(2020).
Currently,Luxembourg is investing heavily into the extension of its fibre optics network (Fibre To The Home, or FTTH), recently making the Top 20 in theEuropean Fibre Home Penetration Ranking, with over 20% of homes in Luxembourg currently having access to these networks.
Last update14.01.2025
For more information
Technological environment
Practical guide to getting settled in Luxembourg
Finding a place to live
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/settling-in/trouver-logement.html
Finding a place to live
Searching, renting, buying ... A lot of people would like to find a place to live in the Grand Duchy. This page will provide you with all the useful information you need to guide you through the process of renting or buying property.
Getting started
Taking stock of the real estate market can be a daunting task, especially if you are new to a country.TheHousing Observatorycollects collects data on the housing marketand, throughout the year, analyses the supply and prices of housing and building plots. It also gives you comprehensive overviews of price evolution in different towns throughout Luxembourg, as well as Luxembourg City's various boroughs. You can check theaverage price per square metre for eachmunicipality (place)and for each district inLuxembourg City, based on the average displayed price for classified ads on a real estate website.
Bear in mind that theresident population is growing constantly - it increased by 20% between 2010 and 2018(from 512,029 to 613,894), and this has placed a considerable burden on the property market, despite efforts to increase the construction of housing. As a result, the prices are relatively high. The price of apartments has climbed faster than that of houses, especially in Luxembourg City and neighbouring municipalities.
In the Grand Duchy, as elsewhere, trying to find a place to live involveslooking at property listings on specialised websites and in the local press. It is also possible to contact directly any of the numerousestate agentsin the Grand Duchy or via theVivi property information and advertisement portal. Many online real estate portals also advertise online and in the press, and they will be a go-to for a good overview of Luxembourg's real estate market.
Staying informed
Procedures are different from country to country, but in Luxembourg you cancheck and complete existing procedures and financial aid schemes (not just relating to real estate) easily on Guichet.lu, Luxembourg's online administrative portal. Check out their page onhow to go about renting an accommodationand aboutprocedures to go through to buyyour own home.
Are you concerned aboutnot knowing your rights in regards to renting or buying accommodation? The Luxembourg Consumers' Union can offer you information and assistance in order to better understand your rights and obligations in terms oflease contractsandconstruction law.
What to look out for?
So, now you have an idea where to look and have found that charming appartement or house you've been dreaming about. What are the next steps?
Registration and municipal services
As soon as you are moving, you will need toregister at the local authority of the place you are moving to. If you are moving within Luxembourg, they will contact your former authority and announce your move. However, if you are moving to Luxembourg, different rules may apply.
Getting connected
Broadband internet is available everywhere in Luxembourg, together with a fast expanding fibre optics network. Although the infrastructure is owned by Post Luxembourg, residents arefree to choose their provider.
Water, gas and electricity
In the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, consumers are free to choose their electricityor natural gas supplier. Check out theCalculix website of the Luxembourg Regulatory Institute(ILR), which can find you the best deal for your new accommodation.
For yourwater supply, you will need to contact yourmunicipal administration.
Insurance
When you arrive, you should think about taking out the following insurance policies with one of the insurance companies established in Luxembourg:
You will find alist of insurance companiesestablished in the Grand Duchy on the website of the Supervisory Authority for the Insurance Sector (Commissariat aux Assurances).
What else to look out for?
Whether you are renting a property or buying one, here are a few things to look out for:
Renting a property
Relocation agencies
To find a property to rent, you can also use arelocation agency. These companies offer apersonalised service to facilitate your installation in a new residence. they can help you look for a flat, deal with the administrative formalities, find a school for your children, etc.
Rent and other charges
For rented properties,agency fees generally represent the equivalent of one month's rent, to which is added 17% VAT. Before moving in, you must also pay adeposit (rental guarantee) of up to three months' rent, as stipulated in yourrental agreement. In some cases this deposit is paid directly to the owner, or it may be put into a blocked bank account in the form of a bank guarantee. Anyone wanting to rent a property who doesn't have the resources to pay the deposit required by the owner canapply for financial assistance from the Stateto fund the deposit.
Flat- and house-sharing
This can be an interesting alternative for anyone looking for a degree of conviviality andwanting to keep their accommodation costs down. Visit websites such asAppartager.lu, which allow you to advertise and look for advertisements for flat-sharing in the Grand Duchy! Be aware that a charge may be made for some of these advertisements!
Are you energy-saving or energy-consuming?
While you are browsing the property listings, be sure tocheck theenergy performance certificateof the different properties available. This mandatory document, that the owner must have drawn up by experts, provides interesting information on the energy performance of your future home.
Buying a property
Tax credit
It should be noted in this context that the Luxembourg Government has introduced an allowance known as thetax creditto reduce the ancillary expenses associated with buying property. The credit applies to registration and transcription fees and is available to anyone wishing to acquireproperty(and certain types of outbuilding) for personal residential purposes.
State assistance
People wishing to buy residential property are also entitled toseveral types of financial assistance from the State, but certain conditions apply.
More information can be found at theCitizens portaland on the website of theMinistry of Housing.
The energy performance certificate
It should also be noted that it is obligatory to arrange for anEnergy Performance Certificateto be drawn up whenever there is a change of owner or tenant in a residential building. More information about this is available on theKlima-Agence.luwebsite.
Clever ideas for students
If you are a full-time student, youcan apply for student rental accommodation on the website of the University of Luxembourg's Student Housing Unit.Students usually rent a furnished room in a residence or a fitted-out house shared with other young people. Furnished and fitted-out studios are only available for doctoral students. Existing accommodation, which costs between €350 and €590 per month, is allocated based on availability. However, waiting lists can be long.
Last update11.11.2024
For more information
Practical guide to getting settled in Luxembourg
Housing support bonuses and services to make you feel at home
Student accommodation
Pied de page
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/settling-in/settling-in-luxembourg.html
Practical guide to getting settled in Luxembourg
Adjusting to life in a new country can feel overwhelming, with so much to figure out at once. From finding a place to call home and opening a bank account to choosing the right insurance, exploring transportation options, and enrolling your kids in schools or care facilities, the to-do list can seem endless. That's why we've put together this guide—to help you tackle those first steps with confidence and make settling in as smooth as possible.
Finding a place to live and getting registered
Choosing a new place to live is one of life's big decisions, where many different factors need to be taken into account.
Ourarticle on renting or buying property in Luxembourgholds much valuable information about the things to look out for when renting or buying, including procedures, useful websites and getting connected.
Luxembourg is incredibly varied when it comes to where you want to live. Find out more about the possibilities in ourguide on where to live in Luxembourghelps you choose the right region for your needs
But no matter where you end up living, make sure toregister with local authoritiesas soon as possible. Not only will you get the certificate of residence that you will need at a number of administrations, you will also benefit from two days' leave granted to people who move.
Banks and Insurances
A number ofinsurances are mandatory or highly recommendedin Luxembourg:
As for opening a bank account,many international retail banks have branch offices in Luxembourg, but there is also a number of local banks with a network of ATMs and local offices. Formalities to open an account differ, but usually you will need toprovide proof of identification, proof of residency and proof of employment or regular income.
The number of procedures to complete may seem overwhelming at first, butthanks toGuichet.lu, Luxembourg's online administrative portal,you will be able to complete many of them online andsigned them digitally with asecure digitalLuxtrust certificate.
Mobility
Getting around in Luxembourg is quite easy, especially withfree public transport. Bikes are also a great and ever more popular way to get from A to B, due to the country's fast expanding bike lane network.
Ifyou bring your car, you will need toregister it at the SNCAwithin 6 months after having registered with local authorities. Aroadworthiness certificatemay also be needed.
Finally, if you have aforeign driver's licenseand you come from a European Economic Area member state,it remains valid. Driving licenses from other countries must beregistered at the SNCAfor them to be valid in Luxembourg.
Education and Kids' Care
Luxembourg's education system is built onprovidingequal opportunities for all children. This includes amultilingual regime on the different education levelsandfree child care.
Registration for daycare centres and Maisons relaisis made at a local level. Fundamental schools are also managed by the municipalities. As forsecondary education, enrolmentinto one of the public or privately operated schools is made at the respective school.
Last update02.12.2024
For more information
Where to live in Luxembourg?
Finding a place to live
Living
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/settling-in/aides-au-logement.html
Housing support bonuses and services to make you feel at home
Decent and quality housing is one of the factors that contributes to people's well-being, both for tenants and home owners. The recent reform of the legal framework, which came into force in September 2023, improves the system of individual subsidies and helps to better manage the public affordable housing stock. Find out more about the main subsidies available for tenants and home owners, including support for sustainable housing and energy efficiency.
Housing benefits for tenants
How to find a property
In addition to the private market, publicly owned property developers and municipalities all have properties that have benefited from a government contribution and are available to rent at affordable prices. TheNational Affordable Housing Strategyis increasing the number of such properties available.
This housing is built or managed by the publicly owned property companies Fonds du logement and Société nationale des habitations à bon marché (SNHBM), as well as by some municipalities via their social welfare office and by social support organisations.
Properties that have benefited from a government contribution and are offered for rent by theFonds du logementare aimed at low-income households or non-profit associations which make housing available for vulnerable individuals. The conditions of access and practical terms are clearly set out on the Fonds du logement website.
For its part, theSNHBMoffers two types ofaffordable rental property:
People on low income with difficulties accessing the housing market also have the option to rent a property as part of the social rental management programme. A partner, approved by the Ministry of Housing, provides affordable housing adapted to the composition of the household for a maximum period of three years. During this period, the tenant must agree to be monitored by social services. The list of approved partners is available on thelogement.luwebsite.
State support for renting
One form of support is arent subsidy. This financial support is intended for adults who are legally resident in Luxembourg, who are  on a  low income and who already rent or wish to rent accommodation. The accommodation must serve as their primary permanent residence. All the details, as well as the application forms, are available onguichet.lu.
A  rental lease, or a residential tenancy lease, is  an agreement whereby the owner (landlord) of a dwelling and a tenant freely set the duration and specific conditions of the rental agreement. The legislation in force on rental agreements applies only to accommodation let out to private individuals as their  main place of  residence. This agreement may be verbal, but for greater security  it  is advisable to enter into a written  rental agreement. The law stipulates that the  maximum amount of rent  that the landlord can demand cannot exceed 5 % of the amount which he or she has invested in the building, except in the case of social housing and luxury housing. The Ministry of Housing has provideda brochure and a calculatorto  enable you to calculate the maximum rent for a rental property.
When the rental lease agreement is concluded, the landlord may demand the payment of  a rental deposit; this sum may not exceed three months' rent. The purpose of the deposit is to serve as a guarantee for the payment of rent, additional charges, and any damage that may be caused to the property.
To finance the rental guarantee, there is assistance available to adults legally residing in Luxembourg who wish to rent accommodation but do not have the necessary means. Under certain conditions, the Ministry of Housing can act as guarantor. In return, the tenant will have to commit to saving the total amount of the rental deposit over a period of three years. All the conditions, as well as the application forms, are available onguichet.lu.
Welcome home –Wëllkomm an ärem Doheem
The recent reform of the legal framework, which came in force at the beginning of September 2023, improves the system of public aid. For more information, please contact the"guichet"dedicated to housing benefits:
Housing support for home owners
How to find a property
The housing available via theHousing Fundis aimed at people who meet certain conditions; in particular they must be a private individual (not a company) and occupy the property as a private dwelling, and they must not already own a property in Luxembourg or another country. All the practical details and forms are available on the Fonds du logement website.
TheSNHBMoffers turnkey, fully  finished properties on the basis of certain criteria including  income and assets ceilings. Details ofcurrent and future projectscan be found on the SNHBM website.
Other state aid
Several indirect support mechanisms are currently available. We would advise you to go to theproperty tax section on the logement.lu websiteto find out more and to seeguichet.lufor practical details about procedures.
Today, housing must meet the three requirements of sustainable development: it must be ecological, economical and social. The Ministry of Housing offers a series of benefits related to the energy performance of a property:
Klimabonus - John : renovation of a listed house and transition to renewable energies (Video/Audio YouTube)
You can find all the key information about financial support for energy efficiency and renewable energy sources on theKlima-Agencewebsite, especially details about the energy passport, building a low-energy/passive home, the subsidy to encourage the use of electricity from renewable sources, and available subsidies.
Last update20.01.2025
For more information
Practical guide to getting settled in Luxembourg
Wage levels
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/health-and-social-security/health-services-practical-information.html
Health service
Do you need a doctor or are you looking for a helpful telephone number? Are you seeking dietary advice, information on drug prevention or guidance about a service for seniors? This page aims to provide you with all the useful information you'll need if you are looking for medical advice or have general questions about the health system.
Emergency and on-call doctors, chemists and hospitals and medical centres
Emergency numbers
In Luxembourg, the following numbers are available 24/7 for emergencies:
24/7 care: medical centres
Fornight or emergency care, patients can go toone of the threemedical centresin Luxembourg City, Esch-Alzette and Ettelbruck.
They operate as GP surgeries and provide on-call medical care outside normal consulting hours:
You will find more information on the dedicated websites
Assistance and care at home
The Grand Duchy has anextensive network of home assistance and care. There are currently 13 home care networks in Luxembourg. They work seven days a week all year round. The cost of care and assistance at home is covered by theNational Health Fund (CNS), throughdependence insurance.
More information is available on theLuxseniorwebsite! This website is mainly aimed at seniors and their family. It offers a wide range of information onactive ageingand provides information on the various services that are available to elderly people living at home or in care facilities.
Persons with disabilities
There are many associations in the Grand Duchy striving to integrate and improve living conditions for persons with disabilities:
Drugs and substance abuse
On the Health Portal, you can find more information onillicit substances and addictions, prevention, drug-related support services, key data, etc.
Food safety
The Luxembourg population is kept informed in the event of problems with foodstuffs via anearly warning system, managed by the Government Commissioner for Quality, Fraud and Food Safety, All the information is available on theFood Safety Portal.
eHealth services
eHealth services facilitate the sharing and exchange of patient health databetween the various professionals involved in their medical care. They facilitate the monitoring and coordination of care and allow you, as a patient, to play an active role in your medical care via a unique account, your'eHealth account'. Here are the services you can currently benefit from:
If you are registered with the health service in Luxembourg you can currently benefit from the exchange of the patient summary, by registering your consent in your SHR (Profile Configurator/Access Rights).
Last update25.02.2026
For more information
Social security
Family allowances
Precision health – giving patients a voice
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/health-and-social-security/precision-health-fagherazzi-lih.html
Precision health – giving patients a voice
Guy Fagherazzi has his work cut out. Recruited in 2019 as a researcher at the Luxembourg Institute for Health (LIH) for his expertise in epidemiology and cohort studies, the scientist found himself at the epicentre of Luxembourg's response to COVID-19 in 2020. With the support of the Government, the LIH and the University, he leads the Predi-COVID study, which gathers data from COVID-19 patients. The aim of the study is to shorten the response time in the event of a future pandemic. But Guy Fagherazzi's main work is on precision health, in other words the way in which treatments can be adapted to each patient and their individual needs, beyond the clinical environment.
Dr Fagherazzi, we have just mentioned personalised medicine and precision health. What do these terms actually mean?
Personalised medicine and precision health are two closely related concepts. Personalised medicine focuses on treating, diagnosing and monitoring patients, while precision health is a broader concept that goes beyond personalised medicine and also covers aspects of prevention and precision public health.The basic idea is to move away from standardised medicine for everyone, in which the same approaches are used regardless of the patient, and towards much more individualised treatments. We try to identify the best approach in line with each individual's profile so that we can meet the patient's needs as closely as possible.
In your personal statement on the LIH website, you indicate that you want to 'pave the way for modern real-life health research studies'. What is so revolutionary about this new approach to medical research?
The goal of this approach isto incorporate new technologies into clinical researchand also, in the future, to apply these technologies to patient monitoring as part of standard clinical practice. One aim is to identify patient groups or profiles that can serve as a basis to adapt the treatment of individuals with chronic diseases.
We are also trying todevelop the future of research, with vast quantities of data collected thanks to new technologies, for example via patients' smartphones. These methods fall within the realm of big data and artificial intelligence and are applied to address specific clinical needs – that is our aim in the department.
What technologies are you developing in this area?
Within the department, we are working onsmartphone applications and connected medical devices. We are also working on two digital information sources that may help us to adapt our treatments.
The first issocial media posts by patients themselves. By gathering these data – we currently have access to around a billion data points from social media –, we are able to identify the main concerns of people suffering from chronic diseases like diabetes or cancer. In a traditional clinical research context, we would not have access to this information.
The second source of information comes from ourresearch on vocal biomarkers. In other words,we are exploring subtle changes to people's voices. These changes, which are not always perceived by the human ear, are signals that can help to diagnose an individual's state of health using artificial intelligence. Tiny variations in someone's voice can indicate whether the person is ill or not.
Can you give us some examples of specific applications?
In the field of oncology, mental health problems such asfatigue, stress, anxiety and depressionare very common during cancer treatment, especially chemotherapy, andwe can monitor these by analysing the voice. In the long term this should help us offer more personalised treatment. This is our vision as we try to develop our work.
When it comes to people with diabetes, we can use a screening tool to detect diabetes from a person's voice, for example via an audio recording.We have already tested this approach for COVID-19 detection.
Dr Guy Fagherazzi isDirector of theDepartment of Precision Healthat theLuxembourg Institute of Health(LIH) andHead of the Deep Digital Phenotyping Research Unit. He trained as a mathematician and statistician and is an expert in cohort studies. He leads the Predi-COVID study, which monitors thousands of patients affected by the virus during the pandemic. He champions the use of digital tools like artificial intelligence and big data in the field of medicine, especially in diabetes research. In this context, he is a keen advocate of precision health.
How do you extract this data?
We mainly work with public data from social media platforms like Twitter, via a user licence that you can sign with Twitter. This offers access to data for marketing and promotional purposes and also for the purposes of health research. For the past few years we have been using a data collection tool for Twitter that enables us to enter keywords of interest to us about specific diseases that we want to study.
Based on this data, we are establishing aglobal online health observatorywhere we use aggregated monitoring to identify messages from our target population and adapt our research priorities. We don't try to identify individuals; instead we try to identify signals.
In what ways are these 'new' technologies necessary for your work as Research Leader of the research unit?
The research team bases its work on the development of these technologies to gather relevant data. One of the aims is to develop screening tools tofacilitate the detection of diseases at an early stage, unlike invasive blood tests. In some cases, a few seconds of voice recording are enough to provide a first indication of risk. For people with a chronic disease, the idea is to make it easier to monitor the disease on a daily basis (stress, depression, anxiety, pain, fatigue), while personalising treatment based on an objective vocal biomarker.
What are the specialisations of the researchers working with you on these projects?
The team is very multidisciplinary, with a strong focus on new technologies for health. We have doctors, epidemiologists, data scientists and bioinformaticians in the team, and we also plan to incorporate aspects of psychology and sociology to help guide us in how best to integrate these technologies in daily practice. The multidisciplinary aspect brings real added value. Rather than having a very specific, narrow view, we try to approach the question from several complementary angles.
Do you find the talent you need in Luxembourg?
Generally, yes.Luxembourg has the advantage of good working conditions and more importantly a very dynamic research environment.
The country is not yet necessarily very well known at European level, but people are often surprised by the quality, relevance and dynamism of the Luxembourg research environment when they first come into contact with it. That's what happened to me.
And what was it that attracted you to Luxembourg personally?
What attracted me personally was the fact that the research priorities were completely in line with what I wanted to develop.The alignment between the national research priorities on precision medicine, digital health – Luxembourg is strongly committed to these areas.
Deep Digital Phenotyping (DDP)
The Deep Digital Phenotyping teamuses digital data, often from smartphones, to understand and analyse behaviour and health. Applications include detecting disease outbreaks and monitoring chronic diseases and mental health.
Your own career path took you from your initial studies in mathematics and statistics to medical research. How did you reach this point?
I have always loved maths, so much so that I wanted to pursue a career in numbers, in modelling.During my specialisation in biostatistics, I decided to focus on medical applications in the field of health. I then continued with a Master's in Epidemiology, a field that combines a statistics/mathematics approach with specific public health problems.
What I find fascinating is precisely this ability to build bridges between different disciplines by bringing together experts in different areas. My hope is that by working together with medical professionals, I can bring an understanding of medical issues and combine this with aspects of data modelling and research.
COVID-19 must have been the ideal opportunity to put all the theories to the test.
COVID-19 was a big shock for the entire world, but for research it was also a catalyst and an accelerator.At the LIH we immediately organised our efforts under the umbrella of Research Luxembourg and we developed studies at an incredible pace with the resources that were very quickly made available to us. I had never witnessed that in my life before. In the space of a few weeks, we set up alarge-scale cohort study, Predi-COVID, in which we collected data and samples to get a better idea of the profiles of people with COVID-19.
We were also able to collect voice samples from study participants, and this represented a huge source of very valuable, highly relevant information that boosted research on this disease.
Now, with all that COVID-19 has taught us,we can transfer everything that we have learned about methodology to other chronic diseaseslike diabetes, cancer and mental health disorders.
How did the LIH support you during this period?
At the very beginning of the pandemic, we grouped ourselves into a Task Force in which all the research institutes and the University of Luxembourg worked in coordination to develop different research projects. We were given the task of developing the cohort study and monitoring the development of patients and individuals with COVID-19. I was personally in charge of setting up the Predi-COVID study, which is still going today. We are now following a thousand people two years after they were infected with SARS-CoV-2.
At the time, we put other research projects on hold, and for a short but intense period we all concentrated on setting up these research projects.We received financial support from the FNR and theFondation André Losch, which enabled us to develop the research and gave us the resources we needed to make full use of the data we had collected.
What is special about Luxembourg's research environment?
The dynamism, the research priorities and the commitment to developing digital technologies. Luxembourg has always had a history of positioning itself either in niche areas or in a few promising growth areas – and digital technologies are clearly one such area –, and that is ideal for researchers like me. We have broad support to develop innovative research in these fields.
Is there one achievement that you are particularly proud of?
The Predi-COVID study, which is the result of a remarkable team effort. All the LIH teams stepped up and we worked day and night. Even during the lockdown, when we had to work from home, we managed to set everything up in a very short space of time.
On a personal level it is very satisfying because it is thefirst cohort study that illustrates our philosophy of precision health, with a data collection that offers a general overview of the participants. This study enabled us to realise our vision, which we are now successfully applying to other contexts.
What are your plans for your future career?
I am currently at a stage whereI need to show that my ideas and my research are going to have an impact. My aim is tobring vocal biomarkers to clinical practiceso that we can demonstrate their potential and implement them with clinical research projects.
We are internationally recognised in this field, with international collaborations that are gaining pace and supervision for PhD students on the topic. In five years' time, I see myself continuing to develop this area, helping the department to grow and developing more innovative projects.
Is there a side of Luxembourg that you are less keen on?
Like all cross-border workers,working from home is still complicated and traffic jams are an issue. But you get used to it. In terms of public health, one thing that is regrettable is thatthere is not yet a Public Health Act in Luxembourgthat would facilitate access to existing data. We are sitting on a gold mine of data, but there is still no legal framework to make the most of this wealth of material. A law is under discussion, and we are all eagerly waiting for positive developments that will facilitate the use of data for research purposes.
Which three words would you use to characterise Luxembourgers?
When I arrived in Luxembourg, I wasstruck by the openness of the Luxembourg people. When you arrive here from another country, you realise that Luxembourg is European by definition – you need only look at its languages, culture and school system.
Luxembourgers are courteous and polite– maybe more so than some French people!
And since I have had the opportunity to work with colleagues in other institutions, I can say that they are very dynamic and forward-looking.There is a positivity in Luxembourg, a feeling that we have the resources, we have a strategy – how can we improve the situation? And that's something that is very gratifying.
This interview has been edited for the purposes of the article.
Last update13.08.2024
For more information
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Mr Science or science for everyone
Emma Schymanski hunts unknown chemicals
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/health-and-social-security/social-security.html
Social security
Luxembourg has one of the most effective social security systems in the world. It is accessible to both residents and cross-border workers. The right to social assistance is an important pillar of Luxembourg society and ensures that each person receives universal protection and equal treatment. Discover how the social security system works, find out how to register and delve into the essential services to help you get the best out of the system.
How does Luxembourg's social security system work?
The Luxembourg social security system provides cover and social benefits to all residents as well as individuals carrying out a professional activity in the Grand Duchy. Any person working in Luxembourg must be registered by their employer with theJoint Social Security Centre(CCSS) or register themselves as aself-employed worker. Certain people, such as residents working abroad or occasional workers, may register with the CCSS on a voluntary basis. Moreover, family members who are dependent on the insured person, and who are not personally insured, benefit from co-insurance.
All insured persons are entitled to universal and comprehensive cover through thevarious social security funds, this includes any associated benefits:
Thesocial security contributionspayable by employees are set by the CCSS according to the level of salary and are deducted from the person's income every month.
Social security is administered by public bodies that are managed by the different social partners. TheMinistry of Health and Social Securityand theGeneral Inspectorate of Social Securityplay a major role in the design and control of the sector.
Social security services under one roof
The main social security bodies are housed under one roof at theCité de la Sécurité sociale:
Healthcare and reimbursements
As soon as the employer has notified the CCSS, the latter will register the employee with one of the four funds:
When the person is registered, they will receive anational insurance cardwith a 13-digit registration number, which must be presented each time the person uses a healthcare provider (doctors, dentists, hospitals, etc.).
The health funds reimbursea significant proportion of healthcare costs, such as medical or therapeutic consultations. In principle, the patient pays for the whole healthcare service and is reimbursed for part of the costs. However, since March 2024, doctors and dentists have been able to opt forDirect Immediate Payment(DIP). Under this system, the patient pays only his/her share and the doctor is reimbursed by the health insurance fund. The use of the DIP remains optional - ask your doctor about its implementation.
Individuals wishing to benefit from more comprehensive cover can sign up for avoluntary mutual insurancesuch as the "Caisse médico-complémentaire mutualiste" (CMCM) or take out additional health insurance with a private insurer.
Pension insurance: everything you need to know about the pension system
Any person working in the private sector or receiving areplacement incomein the Grand Duchy is covered by thegeneral pension scheme. Individuals are registered with theCaisse Nationale d'Assurance Pensions(CNAP), which also providesdisabilityandsurvivor'sbenefits. In addition to the general pension insurance scheme, there are special pension schemes for public sector employees and for employees of Luxembourg's national railway company.
This first pillar of the retirement provision is covered by monthly pension contributions payable by the employee and employer, amounting to 8% of gross income. In order toqualify for an old-age pension, the insured person must have reached the age of 65 and have paid contributions for at least 10 years (120 months). Anearly retirement pensionmay be granted under certain conditions from the age of 57.
A second pillar of the retirement provision is made up ofcomplementary pension schemesset up voluntarily by companies. A third pillar comprises complementary pension insurance offered by private insurance companies and banks.
The Luxembourg social security system (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update14.01.2025
For more information
Health service
Family allowances
Help for vulnerable families
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports/luxembourg-women-sport-i.html
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
To celebrate International Women's Day, which takes place on 8th March in many countries across the world, we'll admire the feats of eight sportswomen from Luxembourg. We will revisit their past exploits, as well as their current achievements, and shine a light on their inspirational role for a whole new generation of girls who are starting out on their sporting careers and fighting against stereotypes and discrimination. In this first article, we will focus on the careers ofLory Koster,Ni Xia Lian,Norma ZambonandSandra Schwinninger. In asecond article, we'll turn the spotlight onto the achievements of Christine Majerus, Amy Thompson, Patrizia Van der Weken and Lena Rocca.
Lory Koster (1902-1999), the first woman to participate in the Olympic Games
At the age of 22,Lory Koster took part in the 1924 Paris Olympic Games, thus becoming the first Luxembourg sportswoman to represent her country in the Olympic Games.She competed in swimming, in the 200m breaststroke. In the qualifiers, she finished second in her heat and then sixth in the final, clocking a time of 3min 39s.
However, Lory's talents were not just limited to sport. She was the youngest of five siblings, all of whom had music in their genes, a gift that was passed down from their grandfather, Ferdinand Hoebich, who was the first conductor of the Luxembourg military band. She studied music at the Conservatoire de la Ville de Luxembourg and then continued her education in Brussels, where she became anaccomplished cellist, pianist and saxophonist. In Belgium, she played in the women's ensemble The Stars Ladies Orchestra and, in the 1950s, she became a member of theGrand Orchestre Symphonique de Radio Luxembourg, now known as the Luxembourg Philharmonic Orchestra.
Lory Koster remains aniconic figure in Luxembourg, an Olympic pioneer and a versatile artist.
A pioneering spirit - a truly family affair
Lory Koster is the sister of another Luxembourgish pioneer, the composerLou Koster. When they were young, they played music to accompany silent films together and also performed in swimming pools!
Ni Xia Lian (1963-), the oldest table tennis player in Olympic history
Ni Xia Lian became world table tennis champion in 1983. At the time, she was 20 years old and competed for the Chinese national team. She represented China, where she was born, until 1989, and then she switched allegiances to Luxembourg in 1991. After having competed insix Olympic Games(Sydney 2000, Beijing 2008, London 2012, Rio 2016, Tokyo 2020 and Paris 2024),24 world championshipsand18 European championships, it is difficult to summarise her exploits: her accolades include two times World champion, three times European champion and bronze medallist at the 2019 European Games.
Ni Xia Lian has not rested on her laurels; she continues to push the boundaries of sporting excellence. Not only did she become the oldest female table tennis player in Olympic history following her participation in Tokyo 2020, but she has also maintained her place in the world top 50 ranking.
Still active at the age of 61, Ni Xia Lian remains aglobal symbol of sporting longevity, elegance of play and intergenerational inspiration. It is therefore no coincidence that she was Luxembourg's flag bearer at the opening ceremony of the last Olympic Games in Paris in 2024.
A gift from the sky
Ni Xia Lian has a book dedicated to her personal life and professional career: "Ni Xialian,le don du ciel". Born in Shanghai, she has lived in Luxembourg for more than 30 years. She is an exceptional player and loving mother who has quite naturally become Luxembourg's ambassador to the world.
Norma Zambon (1978-), from winning medals in volleyball to tackling gender equality in sport
After the 2023 edition of theGames of the Small States of Europe, Luxembourg currently ranks third in the all-time medals table, and Norma Zambon has contributed her fair share of medals over many years. The women's national volleyball team in which she plays won five medals between 2005 and 2013,including gold in Monaco in 2007.
Norma Zambon started playing indoor volleyball at the age of 16. Her sports teacher at the Lycée Hubert Clément introduced her to the sport, which she enjoyed mainly for its team spirit: "Even if top players are decisive for the game, without a consistent team performance, their playing strength will fade away," she remarked. At the age of 26, she took up beach volleyball, which "was and remains a big family". Even though she is a member of the national team, she never devoted herself to it professionally. She played volleyball from 1996 to 2008 and beach volleyball from 2005 to 2013. Since then,she has been in charge of the Beach Volleyball Commission of theLuxembourg Federation of Volleyballand currently holds the position of Chairwoman.
Her commitment to sport did not end when she retired.Since 2009, she has been in charge of the sports department in Esch-sur-Alzetteand is involved in developing two key initiatives for promoting gender equality in sport. Firstly, the "Gender Equality in Sport" charter, which was launched in March 2023, and has now been signed by 24 of the city's sports associations. Secondly, theIntegration through sportsproject, a city-led initiative offering sporting activities exclusively for women and girls, including boxing, the Street Defense System and Krav Maga.
In recent years, Norma Zambon has becomeone of the institutional faces of the future of women's sport in Luxembourg.
In her free time...
Not many people know that Norma Zambon loves to crochet in her spare time.  Crochet is a craft technique that involves using a hooked needle to create chains, hats, scarves and blankets. Needless to say, these objects simply blossom in her hands!
Sandra Schwinninger (1981-), the fearless para-swimmer
"Each day of my life is a challenge... and I love it!", exclaims Sandra Schwinninger. She suffers from ataxia which affects the free movement of her arms and legs, and causes significant balance problems. She began training to swim in 2018, at the age of 37, when she completed her rehabilitation at the Rehazenter and after a year's membership of theBack2Sportassociation. "Swimming allows me to feel free, because in the water I don't need help to move around".
Since her debut, Sandra Schwinninger has been on a steady upward trajectory, improving her performances and increasing her presence in European competitions. In competitions, she competes in three disciplines: breaststroke, freestyle and backstroke.In December 2025, at the International Para-swimming Festival in Zagreb, she achieved several personal bests: 200m freestyle in 6:12.08; 100m breaststroke in 2:55.99; and 50m freestyle in 1:15.41.In recent years, the athlete's rapid progress has been praised by her coach. She is already working towards her next goal: the Paralympic Games to be held in Los Angeles in 2028.
Sandra Schwinninger took part in the "I'mPOSSIBLE" project, under the auspices of theLuxembourg Paralympic Committee, which aims to promote inclusion in and through sport, specifically among children aged 6 to 12.She also volunteers at the Back2Sport association.
Sandra has established herself asone of the leading figures in Luxembourgish parasport, a symbol of perseverance and continuous improvement.
A little anecdote
Sandra Schwinninger is the mother of three children aged 2, 10 and 14, and her family means everything to her. When they were extended their house, Sandra climbed onto the roof while it was still under construction. This might seem very risky for a person with no balance, but it was, in fact, a moment of pure joy for her. Accompanied by her husband, Micha, she shouted "hello!" down to her neighbours! "I've learnt that in life you have to dare to do things, otherwise you'll never achieve anything".
Last update20.02.2026
For more information
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Luxembourgish women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (II)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports/luxembourg-women-sport-ii.html
Luxembourgish women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (II)
To celebrate International Women's Day, which takes place on 8th March in many countries across the world, we will admire the feats of eight sportswomen from Luxembourg. We'll revisit their past exploits, as well as their current achievements, and shine a light on their inspirational role for a whole new generation of girls who are starting out on their sporting careers and fighting against stereotypes and discrimination. In this article, we will retrace the careers ofChristine Majerus,Amy Thompson,Patrizia Van der WekenandLena Rocca. Thefirst articlein the series focused on the achievements of Lory Koster, Ni Xia Lian, Norma Zambon and Sandra Schwinninger.
Christine Majerus (1987-), the multi-champion icon of Luxembourg cycling
Cycling was not Christine Majerus's first choice of sport. She initially fell in love with athletics and was national 400m and 800m champion on several occasions. She switched to cycling in her early twenties, after injuries prevented her from achieving the results she wanted on the track.
On two wheels, she excelled from the start, competing in road racing, cyclo-cross and time trials. In Luxembourg,she has been the undisputed national champion for over a decade(12 times in cyclo-cross, 14 times in road races and 16 times in time trials). Also, she has been named Sportswoman of the Year on seven occasions. With her SD Worx team, which she joined in 2013, she has reachedthe top of the world women's cycling rankings. In herfourth Olympic Games appearance(London 2012, Rio 2016, Tokyo 2020 and Paris 2024), she finished 17th in the road race. In 2024, she shone in the WorldTour events with consistent results in the top 30 and once again won the national time trial championship, the icing on the cake of her sporting career, which ended in 2024.
Respected for her role as team captain and her longevity, she remains amajor figure in the history of Luxembourg cycling.
A passion for cycling, with a literary twist...
Christine Majerus is also an illustrator. In the beginning, drawing was a just hobby that allowed her to pass the time in hotel rooms when travelling to competitions. Slowly but surely, it became a passion. Now, we can enjoy this lesser-known side of the Luxembourgish cyclist in the book "E Vëlo fir de Muli" (Revue éditions). Can you guess what the book is about? That's right - cycling!
In the spotlight: Christine Majerus (Team SD Worx) (Video/Audio YouTube)
Amy Thompson (1994-), the red lion of Luxembourg football
Amy Thompson started her sporting adventure in gymnastics, swimming and ballet. By the time she reached 10 years old, she decided that she wanted to play football and table tennis. At the age of 14, she had to choose between the two disciplines, and her ultimate goal became football! It was also at this age that she started to play women’s football, initially for FC Progrès Niederkorn. Ever since, her rise has been unstoppable:at 16, she made her debut for theLuxembourg national team, then between 2013 and 2015, she played in the Bundesliga in Germany. She was also the first Luxembourg footballer to move to the United States, where she studied at university in New York.
On her return to Luxembourg, she had to take a break due to injury and became coach of FC Progrès Niederkorn. In 2021, she joined FC Mamer 32 and stepped out onto the pitch once again as a player. Since then,she has won the title of best player in the Luxembourg football championship twice in a row: the Dribble d'or 2022 and 2023.
A talented striker, Amy Thomson became thetop scorer and most capped player in the history of the women's national teamwith 35 goals in 54 appearances by the end of 2025.
Still at the top of her game, she is now arole model for young players and a driving force behind the progress of women's football in her country.
Um Ball, a film of Tessy Troes (Video/Audio YouTube)
The history of women's football in Luxembourg on the silver screen
Amy Thompson has the first and last lines of the documentary film "Um Ball", directed by Tessy Troes, who is also an avid football fan. This film traces the history of women's football in Luxembourg since 1972, when the first official women's match took place between Belvaux and Bissen. Through the testimonies of former players, the film tells the story of the obstacles faced by the Grand Duchy's women's teams, who for a long time were subjected to ridicule by certain men who, unfortunately, continue to mock their progress to this day.
Patrizia Van der Weken (1999-), the fastest sprinter in Luxembourg's history
Since 2023, a pivotal year for the athlete, Patrizia Van der Weken has enjoyed a meteoric rise, setting record after record and becoming one of Luxembourg's most visible athletes on the international stage.
Patrizia Van der Weken began winning medals in 2015. In her first appearance at the Games of the Small States of Europe, she won bronze in the 4x100m.In 2023, she won gold in the 100m at the Games of the Small States of Europe and the Universiade. She alsobroke several of her personal records, securing her place at the Olympic Games. She thus became the first athlete from Team Lëtzebuerg to secure her place atParis 2024and alsothe first Luxembourgish woman to reach the Olympic 100m semi-finals.
In 2025, she concluded an exceptional indoor seasonwith a triple victory on the World Athletics Indoor Tour (champion in the 60m) and bronze medals at the World and European Indoor Championships (60m). She currently holds thenational recordsfor the 100m (11''00 seconds, Rome 2024) and the indoor 60m (7''01m, Torun 2026).
She was namedSportswoman of the Year in 2023, 2024 and 2025by the Luxembourg Association of Sports Journalists.
An iconic figure in Luxembourg sport today, sheinspires a new generation of athletes with her historic achievements.
An elite athlete at university
An elite athlete, Patrizia Van der Weken also holds a bachelor's degree in International Sports Management. She is currently studying for an MBA in International Sport Management and Digitalisation at the Lunex university in the Grand Duchy.
Your Success is our Drive - Patrizia Van Der Weken (Coque Luxembourg) (Video/Audio YouTube)
Lena Rocca (1999-), an e-sport pioneer
Lena has been on quite a journey: from playing Nintendo DS with her brothers when she was 10 to taking part in the2022 World Esports Championshipwith the Luxembourg team at the age of 23. Her achievement is truly amazing, as she isthe first woman from Luxembourg to take part in the world's biggest e-sports competition.
Initially, she didn't intend to play professionally. As soon as she started secondary school, and then university, she found that she didn't have enough time to practice intensively after class. At this time, she realised that she wouldn't reach the level to become a pro. And yet she managed... in a largely male-dominated world where gender stereotypes are still entrenched. Although e-sport has long been stigmatised and misunderstood by a real sport enthusiasts, it is gradually becoming more accepted. However, women still represent a minority in the e-sport arena.
During the 2022 World Esports Championship, Lena Rocca was part of a mixed team but she was the only woman! Following this experience,one of her projects is to set up an all-female Luxembourg teamto encourage new players to emerge on the competitive scene.
Lena Rocca continues to blaze a new trail, becoming anambassador for diversity and a central figure in the development of women's e-sports.
From e-sport to fashion, with a detour in biology
Lena Rocca is also a fashion model. She started at the age of seven, modelling at a social event for a friend of the family. When she was 19, a photographer asked her to take part in a photo shoot. Since then, she has received numerous requests for shoots, and also modeled during the Fashion Week in Paris and Luxembourg. She combined modelling with studying for her biology degree in Germany: she completed he bachelor's degree in Biology and is now studying for a master's degree in Biology, specialising in Medical Life Science.
Last update24.02.2026
For more information
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports/sport-for-all-luxembourg-living-together.html
Sport for all: living in harmony through active and intercultural activities
Fostering long-term health, stronger social ties, improved mental and physical well-being, a better quality of life and much more! There are many benefits to taking part in sport and leisure activities. Several municipalities and associations offer sports programmes for different age groups which are adapted to the specific needs of certain people.
Sports for all: Luxembourg-City andEsch-sur-Alzette
The new season of theSport for allprogramme of the City of Luxembourg begins every October. This year, the programme offersover 200 courses in the field of sport, leisure, fitness and well-being. The City of Luxembourg programme is aimed at three age groups:
Activities take place from Monday to Sunday, indoors, in the pool or outdoors, and located at more than 30 sites across the city. The season runs from October to July, with a specific autumn-winter programme and another, starting after the Easter holidays, offering more outdoor activities.
Luxembourg-City - Sports for all - Adults (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg-City - Sports for all - 55+ (Video/Audio YouTube)
The city ofEsch-sur-Alzetteis in the process of developing its sports programme to allow all residents to take part:
In addition, manymunicipalities offer programmes and facilities to help you stay physically and mentally healthy all year around. Contact your local municipality for more information!
Sports for people with special needs
Whether due to reduced mobility, intellectual disability or chronic illness, people with special needs can also take advantage of sports activities adapted to their particular requirements.
Foryoungsters:
TheSport-Santélabel
For its part, theFédération luxembourgeoise des associations de sport de santé(Federation of Luxembourg Sport and Health Associations) manages theSport-Santélabel, which brings togethertherapeutic physical activitiesoffered in Luxembourg to people suffering fromchronic illnesses. At present, over 65 hours of physical activity are made available every week bySport-Santé's partners, organisations involved in stroke, cancer, diabetes, neurological diseases and orthopaedic pathologies, among others.
TheLuxembourg Paralympic Committee organises every year theParalympics Days.The event is open to everyone, young and old, big or small, with or without a disability. The aim is to learn about Paralympic sports from experts and athletes from the Committee. The fourth edition of this event was held on 9th November 2024.
Sports as a means to combat discrimination
By cultivating a sense of inclusion and promoting social ties, sport is a means tocombat discriminationof all kinds.
Since 2022, the Luxembourg Football Federation has organised theGirls Foot Day, which aims to develop andpromote women's football, particularly among younger girls and women. Up to 120 girls aged between 6 and 12 took part in thethird edition of the Girls Foot Day, which took place in July 2024.
As part of theIntegration through Sportproject, the city of Esch-sur-Alzetteoffers a wide range ofsporting activities aimed exclusively at women and girlsfrom all cultural backgrounds. Futsal, Pilates, yoga, stretching, running and boxing are just some of the sports on offer.
For its part, theSportunityassociationfocuses on sport as a tool for mutual understanding and peaceful cohabitation between migrants and refugees and residents. The programme includes training sessions with elite sportsmen and sportswomen and free sports lessons, all of which lead naturally to intercultural exchanges, language learning and integration.
The first edition of theLuxembourg Pride Runtook place in July 2023. The purpose of this festive sporting event is to celebrate diversity and inclusion. It is acharity race for companies, organisations and anyone who wants to show their support for the LGBTIQ+ community. All proceeds from the event will go to the organisations Rosa Lëtzebuerg and Centre LGBTIQ+ Cigale. Following the success of the first edition, the race has become one of the country's must-see events.
In Luxembourg, sport is within everyone's reach!
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
Culture for all: an overview
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Nature for all: comfort hiking trails
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports/top5-cyclistes-luxembourgeois.html
Top 5: Luxembourgish cyclists who made the public dream
Luxembourgers have achieved admirable results in many sports, but it is in cycling that they have truly left their mark. An epic climb during a hailstorm, a broken frame in the middle of the race and two brothers showing exemplary loyalty - here are five stories of Luxembourg cyclists who have made (and still make) thousands dream, in the Grand Duchy and beyond. And because there are so many to choose from, we also included two honorary mentions.
Charly Gaul
Charly Gaul was a phenomenon and has given Luxembourg cycling some of its best memories. Born on 8 December 1932 in Luxembourg city, he was namedbest climber of the Tour de France in 1955 and 1956,a title he honoured in1958 when he won the Tour.He was also victorious at theGiro d'Italiain 1956 and 1959.An incomparable climber, he caressed the pedal with fluidity and efficiency, and made light work of mountains and the hardest uphill climbs. The ease with which he overcame the hardest stages in the mountains earned him the nickname"Angel of the Mountains"in the 1950s.
He had his own rhythm - the sprocket on his bike had two teeth fewer than his fellow competitors' bikes - and rarely left the saddle; he seemed to be propelled by a force, a determination, an invisible stubbornness, which made him the winner of ascent after ascent, pass after pass.
The legend was born in 1956, during the Giro d'Italia. On 8 June, on the 12-km ascent of Monte Bondone, in weather conditions that can onlybe described as Dantesquewith snow and temperatures falling to -10°C, Charly Gaul stuck to the race. Whereas several competitors preferred to stop cycling to take hot baths, he carried on climbing relentlessly, and ended the stage as the winner not only of thestage but also of the Giro d'Italia as a whole.
- Eric Fottorino in his obituary which appeared in theLe Mondenewspaper on 7 December 2005
Jean Asselborn
Jean Asselborn has beenLuxembourg's Minister of Foreign Relations since 2004. In his spare time, the head of Luxembourg's diplomatic corps is apassionate cyclist. Whether it is for an interview in Cologne or for his annual 'Tour de France', during which he rides more than 1,000 km, Jean Asselborn rides his bike regularly and is known for his solo rides in the region.
Christine Majerus
Initially attracted to athletics, Christine Majerus (*1987) is several times Luxembourg champion of the 400m and 800m. Her hopes are unfortunately thwarted by a foot injury. A blessing in disguise, one might say. 
 Determined not to give up sport, Christine Majerus decided to devote herself to cycling. 
 Shewon the Coupe de France in 2011 and became the Luxembourg cyclo-cross, time trial and road race champion the same year.
 Her passion for cycling makes her aversatile cyclist, who shines on both the roads and the cyclo-cross trails.
As a result, she regularly ranks among the best riders in the world, such as at the cyclo-cross world championships for the Boels Doelmans team. In2012, she also participated in the London Olympic Games, followed by a participation in Rio de Janeiro in 2016.
For her extraordinary achievements, she was voted Sportswoman of the Year in Luxembourg several times, and she was awarded the honour ofcarrying the flag for the Luxembourg athletes' entry into the 2020 Olympic Games in Tokyo.
Ralph 'Dizzy' Diseviscourt
The ultra-distance cyclist Ralph Diseviscourtis adept at cycling races that seem impossible to complete:the Race Around Austria(2,200 km), the RaceAround Switzerland(also knownas the'Tortour'), the Race Across France (2,500km) and the RaceAcross America(5,000 km).This Luxembourger is not afraid of a monumental challenge!In 2020, he sought a new challenge and beat the24-hour cycling record.
915.39 km in 24 hours at an average speed of 39.1 km/h,that's what it takes to become the world record holder!Along the way, he beat nine other world distance or time records.Not satisfied with resting on his laurels, he surpassed his performance in August 2021 by clocking in 927,86 km! However, he was unable to remove the new record holder, the Austrian Christoph Strasser, from his throne.
Ralph "Dizzy" Diseviscourt was born in Wiltz on 3 July 1976. He discovered cycling relatively late in life at the age of 27, but quickly made up for lost time. Having had a first taste of ultra-distance cycling in 2011,he took the definitive leap of faith in 2014.He won theRace Across the Dolomitesin 2014, the Tortour in 2015 and 2018,the Race Across Italyin 2016,2018 and 2019and finished third in the Race AcrossAustria in2019.However, it was in the prestigious RaceAcross Americawhere he managed to shine, finishing fourth in 2016 and second in 2018, after 9 days, 12 hours and 33 minutes of racing.
Nicolas Frantz
It was in 1928 that this Luxembourger wrote history in the Tour de France.From the very first stage, with the support of his team, he took the yellow jersey and never let it go. Everything seemed to be going smoothly up untilthe19th stage from Metz to Charleville-Mézières. About a hundred kilometres from the finish line, the frame of his bicycle broke. However, luck was on his side and heborrowed a bike from a spectator. Even though the bike was far too small for him, he managed to reach the finish and defended the yellow jersey – a truly incredible feat!
Andy and Frank Schleck
Originally from Mondorf, thebrothers and cyclists Frank (born 1980) and Andy Schleck (born 1985) inspired Schleck-Mania around 2010. The two brothers competed together in the Tour de France and left thousands of spectators around the globe in awe of their achievements.
From an early age, Frank and Andy Schleck took part in competitions and proved their talent nationally before joining the international circuit in 2003 and 2004 respectively. It wasn't long before the victories came thick and fast.
For pair, it is thestage of the Tour de France which took place on 25 July 2009 that will be forever etched in their memories.Andy picked up the pace several times on the climb up Mont Ventoux, showing exceptional tenacity and leaving the contenders behind him. He crossed the finishing line in first place! He successfully completeda legendary breakawaydespite refusing to let go of his brother Frank for several kilometres.
In 2010, following a race that delivered a rollercoaster of emotions,Andy Schleck finished the Grande Boucle in second placebehind Spain's Alberto Contador. Following Contador's disqualification for using illegal substances,Andy was awarded victory by the UCI in 2014.
In 2011, the brothers wrote one of the most beautiful chapters in the history of the Tour de France by finishing second (Andy) and third (Frank) respectively in the final general standings.
The Road Uphill | Trailer (Video/Audio YouTube)
François Faber
François Faber, nicknamed 'the giant of Colombes', holds a world record in cycling,a feat he achieved by winning five successive stages in theTour de France in 1909. He ended up winning the yellow jersey that same year and became a national hero. In fact,as a Luxembourg national, he was the first foreigner to win the "Grande Boucle" (the Big Loop)!
François Faber was born in 1887 in Aulnay-sur-Iton in France; his mother was French and his father was Luxembourgish, from Wiltz. In 1904, he was hired as a docker at the port of Courbevoie, where his brother introduced him to the joys of cycling.The 1909 Tour de France turned him into a legend. He won five stages in a row, and then a sixth... Astonishingly, he led the field for a total of 580 kilometres, and finished in first place on the Champs-Elysées. He competed in the Tour de France from 1910 to 1914 and showed his worth, although he did not manage to win again.
In 1914, François Faber joined the French foreign legion.On 5 May 1915, near Mont-Saint-Eloi, he was told that his wife Eugénie had given birth to a daughter. On 9 May,François Faber died in the attack on the 'Ouvrages Blancs' trenches near Carency. His body was never found.
Last update16.01.2026
For more information
Biking in Luxembourg
LIHPS - Luxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sports
Sport infrastructure in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports/institut-high-performance-sports-luxembourg.html
LIHPS - Luxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sports
Excellence! A key word of Luxembourg's high-level sport. Around 500 Luxembourgish athletes have participated in the Olympic Games since the 1900 edition in Paris. TheLuxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sportsoffersservices and optimal resources adapted to high performance athletes since 2019, with a view to developing high performance sport and prepare athletes for competitions in the best possible conditions. This support highlights Luxembourg's desire to provide elite sports figures with the best conditions.
Bringing high-level sports under the same roof
The institute offers services to athletes preparing for the Olympic games or with realistic prospects of qualifying for the Olympic games, to all other high-level sportspeople who are part of the high-level squad or of the promotional squad of theLuxembourg Olympic and Sports Committee(COSL Squads), who are in the Army's High-Level Sports Section (SSEA) or who benefit from any of the COSL's other support measures. National teams of team sports can also benefit from certain services offered by the LIHPS.
The LIHPS also offers consulting in biomechanics, performance analysis, sports medicine, sports nutrition, sports psychology, strength and physical fitness training, as well as lectures and conferences on sports.  Specialized services are made available to create action plans between athletes and coaches, the COSL and the LIHPS, to select, use and coordinate the LIHPS' different services, to organise expert groups and ongoing feedback on sport performances, to evaluate athletes through the COSL's sporting management, and much more!
By coordinating specialist services for high performance athletes, the institute puts into practice the essential principles of theintegrated concept for sports in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. This concept was designed by the COSL in 2014 with a view toensuring the future and development of Luxembourgish sport at all levels: sports at school, competitive sports, elite sports, the training of coaches, sports medicine, etc.
High-level supervision
LIHPS transmits its skills and know-howto various high-level sports figures in order tosupport them in their quest for excellenceand promotes top-class sports and Luxembourg at international level, whileprotecting the physical and mental health of athletes.This mission is handled by a team of eleven permanent employees, some of whom are not are not unknown to Luxembourg sports enthusiasts. To enhance its services, the LIHPS also works with carefully selected external experts who provide crucial support to the elite athletes.
Thefirstdirectorof the Institute since 2018 isAlwin de Prins, a former competitive swimmer who represented Luxembourg at the Olympic Games in Sydney in 2000, Athens in 2004 and Beijing in 2008. In 2015 and 2017, he was head of mission at the Games of the Small States of Europe (GSSE) in Iceland and San Marino.
Creating the Institute: a logical step
Luxembourg's Olympic Medical Centre(CMOL - Centre médical olympique luxembourgeois)was created in2008-2009. It provides the COSL's athletes with medical support and passes on its know-how to sports federations. There is also an infrastructure that makes it possible to implement the medical and sports projects of athletes and federations.
In2014, the COSL designed theintegrated concept for sportsin the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, which promotesthe development of Luxembourgish sports at all levels while remaining in touch with international competition.
In2018, the articles of incorporation of the Luxembourg Institute for High Performance in Sports were signedandactivitieswere officiallylaunched.The founding members are the Luxembourg Olympic and Sports Committee, theMinistry of Sportsand theLuxembourgish Society for Sports Medicine.
TheLIHPS finally opened in 2019.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Sports
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Health and social security
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports/sport-infrastructure-in-luxembourg.html
Sport infrastructure in Luxembourg
According to a recent Eurostat study, Luxembourgers are only in the European average in terms of sports practice. However, the facilities and sports equipment place the Grand Duchy at the top of the podium, because the sports facilities are numerous, generally of good quality and especially modern.
Indeed, the Luxembourg government attaches great importance to building new infrastructure. These achievements are aimed at providing the sports movement with training and competition conditions more adapted to the requirements of modern sport. The last blow is the national football/rugby stadium located in the belt of the City of Luxembourg.
Other major sports facilities that characterize the world of national sport are the National Sports Institute (INS), the National Sports and Cultural Center of Coque, the nautical base in Lultzhausen, the Kockelscheuer ice rink, as well as the future velodrome that will host cyclists in Mondorf-les-Bains. Below that, Luxembourg also has a national network of 23 bicycle paths that covers some 900km.
Football stadium
Among the flagship sports infrastructure projects is the new football / rugby stadium built on a site between the Cloche d'Or and Kockelscheuer. Once completed and operational, this new arena should accommodate some 10,000 people, obviously sitting on covered seats. VIP areas, kiosks, press rooms and a business club with kitchen are also planned in this brand new building. All this, surrounded by an envelope covered with diamond-shaped metal elements, will make this sports field one of the most modern and modular in the Greater Region.
Completed in 2020, the Luxembourg stadium, built in accordance with FIFA / UEFA standards (stadium category 4) and World Rugby standards, should also enhance the image of the city or country as a modern and attractive destination.
The National Sports Institute (INS)
For aspiring athletes, the INS is the ideal place to develop their sporting talent. Because this training and education centre is mainly for young people, trainees and teams. It allows them to train in professional conditions. The INS also provides sports and recreation facilities to the Sportlycée during school periods.
The INS includes several sports halls, an athletics stadium, a synthetic football field, a multipurpose fitness room, combat and amateur dance hall for amateurs as well as beach volleyball courts.
The National Sports and Cultural Centre (Coque)
One of the biggest sports centres in the Grand Duchy is located in Kirchberg just a stone's throw from the city center. This is the National Sports and Cultural Center commonly known as the Coque.
In the heart of this beautiful building, which has the shape of a scallop shell, is a large aquatic center, including a competition Olympic pool, an initiation pool, a pool, paddling pools, a diving tower and a diving pit.
In addition to its function as a sports centre, the Coque is used for major sporting and cultural events and also as a conference centre. The arena of 4,300 square meters can accommodate some 8,000 people.
Nautical base in Lultzhausen
The nautical base Lultzhausen allows school classes and groups of young people to discover water sports and outdoor activities. Under the motto "sports discovery", "education through sport" and "promotion of healthy lifestyles", programs in these areas are offered to school classes and youth groups. Teachers, educators and coaches can also take courses in sports discovery, education through sport and promotion of healthy lifestyles and competitive sport.
In 2018, courses for school classes and youth groups have been offered in canoeing, geocaching, kayaking, stand-up paddling, sailing, mountain biking, orienteering, rafting and climbing.
During the 2017/2018 school year, the centre hosted a total of 126 classes and 60 youth groups with a total of 4,474 unique participants.
Kockelscheuer Ice Rink
Luxembourg's largest ice rink is located in Kockelscheuer on the outskirts of the city. It is public, covered and open all year round. More than 125,000 visitors regularly make their rounds here.
Visitors have the opportunity to rent skates on site and helmets. The cafeteria offers refreshments and snacks.
National Velodrome
A project that currently exists only on paper is the national velodrome. It is in the birthplace of the Schleck brothers in Mondorf-les-Bains opposite the future European School that it will be built. The 250-metre long and 7-metre wide wooden track is at the heart of this large sports complex, which hosts a swimming pool, a multisport hall, tennis courts as well as commercial areas.
The velodrome, whose construction will begin in 2020, will cost around 60 million euros.
Last update05.09.2024
Wellness: magical moments of well-being and relaxation
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Sport for all: living in harmony through active and intercultural activities
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/luxembourg-south-minett-culture-highlight.html
The cultural South
The South of Luxembourg, the Minett region – also called the Land of the Red Rocks – embodies a fascinating cultural metamorphosis, where industrial heritage blends with a rich artistic scene. From theKulturfabrikin Esch-sur-Alzette and the National Mining Museum in Rumelage, through to Belval’s renovated blast furnaces, this famous cosmopolitan and multilingual region celebrates its past while cultivating artistic, scientific and multicultural initiatives that shape its contemporary identity. Read on to meet some of the key figures involved in the cultural sector of the South and get to know their personal cultural highlights.
Sandy Artuso, Head of Finance and Operations at FerroForum
Sandy Artuso comes from the Minett region and is now project manager at theFerroForumwhere she manages the financial and administrative aspects. After an international and university career in literature, she became involved in the Luxembourg theatre scene, specifically as part of theIndependent Little Liescollective and theLEQGFassociation, which is dedicated to queer feminist research.
As someone who is very active in production,Sandy is particularly fond of theEscher Theater,which she has frequented since she was a teenager. Shealso values summer initiatives such as the opening of the terrace of theRatelachat theKulturfabrik, one of the South’s iconic venues.
The cultural South - Sandy Artuso, FerroForum (Video/Audio YouTube)
The video is subtitled in Luxembourgish, French, German and English.
Sandy Artuso emphasises that, at the  FerroForum, they don't limit themselves to appreciating the industrial heritage: the venue also holds concerts, fairs, festive events such as theFeierowend, and even educational castings. Here, the industrial workers' past and contemporary creation meet, making this venue a veritable cultural driving force of the South.
John Rech, director of theopderschmelzregional cultural centre
The cultural South - John Rech, opderschmelz (Video/Audio YouTube)
The video is subtitled in Luxembourgish, French, German and English.
John Rech is a key figure in the cultural landscape of Southern Luxembourg. As director of theopderschmelzcultural centre and coordinator of the cultural department for the town of Dudelange, he combines artistic expertise with organisational skills. A former communications officer who briefly worked at the Chamber of Deputies, he has primarily travelled the world as a musician and tour manager, in particular with his solo projectDreamcatcher, and he is also a cartoon author working in collaboration with Andy Genen. He therefore brings a multifaceted approach to creation.
In Dudelange, he manages a rich programme that extends far beyond the main concert hall: two arts centres, open-air events and a series of iconic festivalssuch asZeltik, Jazz Machine or Usina.As a lover of live music, he is also at his happiest in venues such as theKulturfabrikor theRockhal, where he finds the raw energy of these concerts deeply moving.
But his high point is still theFête de la musique, which he considers to be one of the most beautiful events of the year.
Christian Mosar, director of theKonschthaland theBridderhaus
Christian Mosar, director of theKonschthalin Esch and theBridderhaus, sees, in the South of Luxembourg,a landscape in constant transformation, where culture is continually reinventing itself. He underlines the importance of iconic venues such as theKulturfabrik, theSpektrumin Rumelange or the heritage sites ofBelval, which link the industrial past with contemporary creation.
For him,theNuits de la Culturein Esch epitomise this collective dynamic, thanks to the remarkable involvement of residents and volunteers. The South offers a unique cultural density, with accessible and varied events all week.
At theKonschthal,Christian Mosar champions a policy of accessibility and of dialogue between local and international artiststhrough the committed exhibitions and the residences at the Bridderhaus.He highlights Luxembourg’s role as a European platform, capable of breaking down linguistic barriers in contemporary art.
The cultural South - Christian Mosar, Konschthal and Bridderhaus (Video/Audio YouTube)
The video is subtitled in Luxembourgish, French, German and English.
TheKonschthal, a young institution, born in the run up to Esch2022,is establishing itself as a place of artistic experimentation and socio-political reflection, where contemporary art holds a dialogue with current global issues.
We would like to thank Sandy Artuso, John Rech and Christian Mosar for granting us these interviews.
Last update24.10.2025
For more information
Cultural capital
Theatre production - a varied programme of international quality
Minett Trail: 11 lodges to discover the region
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/luxembourg-city-capital-culture-favourites.html
Cultural capital
Luxembourg City, a cosmopolitan capital at the heart of Europe, is a cultural crossroads with a vibrant blend of art, cinema, theatre and music. The city, which was European Capital of Culture in 1995 and 2007, has an outstanding cultural scene, including a wide range of museums, theatres and festivals. Prestigious institutions like Mudam, the Grand Théâtre and the Philharmonie have impressive line-ups of renowned international and local artists. Read on to find out more about some of the key figures involved in the sector in Luxembourg City and their personal cultural highlights.
Steph Meyers, Director of Rotondes
Since 2016, Steph Meyers has been the Director ofRotondes. He was previously in charge of exhibition programming at CarréRotondes, then at Rotondes.
In Luxembourg City,Steph takes full advantage of the vibrant cultural scene, regularly attending events at a variety of venuessuch as neimënster, the Philharmonie, den Atelier, Mudam and the Casino. Heparticularly enjoys the open-air concertsorganised during the summer months byneimënster,den AtelierandDe Gudde Wëllen.
In 2025,he is especially looking forward toLUGA– Luxembourg Urban Garden, a unique exhibition of urban gardens, temporary installations and agricultural projects in places that do not usually house cultural events. Steph finds it fascinating that LUGA is being held outside, in spaces around the city, in what is a new cultural format for Luxembourg.
Cultural capital – Steph Meyers, Rotondes (Video/Audio YouTube)
The video is subtitled in Luxembourgish, French, German and English.
At Rotondes, despite the ongoing construction work, events are still happening, either on site or at alternative venues. The "Congés annulés" festival will continue for as long as possible over the summer.
Nadine Clemens, General Coordinator ofDesign Luxembourg
Cultural capital – Nadine Clemens, Design Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
The video is subtitled in Luxembourgish, French, German and English.
Nadine Clemens has been General Coordinator ofDesign Luxembourgsince October 2024. With a background in history of art, she previously worked in the communication and press departments atMudam– The Contemporary Art Museum of Luxembourg and atCasino Luxembourg– Forum d'art contemporain. It was here that she developed a passion for design, which led her to co-found theDesign Friendsassociation in 2009 to invite international designers to Luxembourg.
In Luxembourg City,Nadine likes going to theLëtzebuergCity Museum, especially when it exhibits its impressive poster collectioncovering the entire 20th century, which offers a unique window onto Luxembourg's history, politics, tourism, trade and culture.
Every year, she eagerly awaits theLuxembourg City Film Festival.She is particularly fond of films aimed at children and young adultsand is fascinated by the development of this niche at national and international level over the past 15 years – she often comes across real cinematic gems that are rarely shown in traditional cinemas.
Preparations for the Luxembourg Design Festival and the Design Awards are in full swing. The festival, which will run from 13 to 16 November 2025 in Luxembourg City, is set to be a wonderful celebration of design.
Luka Heindrichs, co-founder ofDe Gudde Wëllenand manager of Twist & Tweak
Since the launch ofDe Gudde Wëllen, Luka Heindrichs has also been closely involved in various associations. He managesTwist & Tweak, a cultural agency specialising in events organisation.
In Luxembourg City,Luka is a fan of Rotondes, which has a programme of events and concerts that reflect his tastes. He also enjoys a night out at den Atelier in Hollerich or thecity's theatres.He especially appreciates small-scale events organised by independent companies or young ensembles.
His favourite summer event is the"Congés annulés"festival at Rotondes. These musical evenings throughout the month of August are exactly the kind of event he likes in terms of style and size. He likes beingat the centre of the action.
Cultural capital – Luka Heindrichs, De Gudde Wëllen (Video/Audio YouTube)
The video is subtitled in Luxembourgish, French, German and English.
This year,De Gudde Wëllenhas a great line-up of events planned, but for those looking for something outside Luxembourg City Luka also recommends theUSINAfestival in Dudelange. And of course one of the highlights of the calendar is the"Fête de la Musique", celebrated in Luxembourg City.
This summer, don't missMikrokosmos, a new chapter forDe Gudde Wëllen! In the lush green setting of the park in Luxembourg City,Mikrokosmoshas been created as part of Luxembourg's LUGA urban garden festival. It will host a variety of open-air events and laid-back sessions for curious minds looking to enjoy park life in the city.
On the menu: music, nature, food and culture.
Booknow!
We would like to thank Steph Meyers, Nadine Clemens and Luka Heindrichs for agreeing to these interviews.
Last update28.01.2026
For more information
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Artistic creation
Architectural walk around Luxembourg City
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/the-touristic-south.html
The touristic South
The south of Luxembourg has long been associated with Luxembourg's industrial development. In fact, the region ofThe Land of the Red Rocksowes its name to the bright red colour of the ore which was, since the end of the 19th century, at the origin of thesuccess of the iron and steel industry in Luxembourgduring the industrial era.In constant evolution, particularly following the shutdown of blast furnaces in the 1990s of the 20th century, the region is demonstrating enormousdynamism in transforming its past assets into resources for both the present and the future.This is an invitation on a journey to The Land of the Red Rocks through some places that you never thought you would find in the South. Let's go!
Minett ParkFond-de-Gras, an outdoor museum
Fond-de-Graswas one of the most important mining centres in Luxembourg. It is now a great example of transforming resources of the past into a touristic heritage and learning space.
The story of this transformation is fascinating. A few years after the last mine of Fond-de-Gras was closed in 1964, volunteers committed to operate atourist trainwith historical steam locomotives: theTrain 1900saw the light in 1973. A few years later, it was the turn of a former mine to reopen, which can be visited on theMinieresbunnmining train.
Love trains and keen on Luxembourgish history? TheMinett Parkis a must! During this visit, you will discover the valley whose sides were pierced by mining galleries; the village of Lasauvage, site of one of the oldest iron and steel installations in Luxembourg; and the two historic trains, among others. You can also have fun on the draisines (rail-bikes) along the railway line between Fond-de-Grad and Bois-de-Rodange!
A journey at the heart of human migration
Immigration played a major role in Luxembourg's economic development in the 19th century, associated in particular with mining. Visiting theMinett Parkmeans you can browse the location, while theDocumentation Centre for Human Migrations (Centre de documentation sur les migrations humaines)based in Dudelange invites you to capture the soul behind Luxembourg's success.
Without immigrants, who now make up a large part of the population in the Grand Duchy, Luxembourg would not look the same. It represents a unique remembrance place that allows you to grasp Luxembourg's society in all its diversity.
Did you know that Dudelange even had an Italian Quarter,Little Italy? Discover it by visiting the Documentation Centre and taking a stroll down its street!
A unique place for outdoor activities
In its transition from an industrial enclave to a tourist area, the region has also been able to showcase its unique natural landscape, which is now an invitation to outdoor activities. In fact, the old mines have become realbiodiversityhot spots. The rocky remnants, low fertility substrates and warm, dry microclimate in summer have favoured the development of dry grasslands with anastonishing diversity of orchids, butterflies, birds and wild bees.
How to discover these special places? If you fancy anadrenaline kickand you are acycling fan, why not enjoy the manymountain bike trailsin the region?
Do you literally want to monkey about? Experience atreetop adventurewith your family or friends inParc l'Eh Adventures. It offers up to seven routes with different levels, so the young and old alike can take up a challenge in complete safety. The easiest route is 5 metres tall and is just what the fainthearted and beginners need. The extreme route reaches 17 metres high and features a 6-metre freefall!
If you would actually prefer a morepeacefulyetactiveadventure, a wide range ofhiking trailsawait you. Don't miss our article dedicated tohikingso you can discover the South of Luxembourg in style!
RedRock MTB Trails (Video/Audio YouTube)
Minett (Video/Audio YouTube)
Esch-sur-Alzette, a cospmopolitan and green capital
The South is also acosmopolitanregion. For example,Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg's second largest city, is home to over 35,000 people of over 120 nationalities! In recent years, a large number of modern and alternative cultural spaces have seen the light of day.
If you are an architecture lover, do not miss the opportunity to discover the history of the city through its facades: thisarchitectural walkwill enchant you!
If you fancygreen areasin the city, Esch-sur-Alzette'sGaalgebiergis just what you need. It is much more than a municipal park: in fact, a hill features a vast forest with lots of strolls, a camping site, an animal park, a naturally frozen ice rink...
The Belval district, on the other hand, offers a beautiful approach to the industrial past. The rehabilitation of theBelval blast furnaceas a tourist area is a symbol of the South's transition. Following the switch to electric power in 1993, blast furnace B in Esch-Belval, the last one still in operation in Luxembourg, was shut down. In 1997, a last symbolic casting marked the end of a great era. Blast furnace A has been available to visit since 2014. Take the staircase along the old pressure reactor and follow the information on the plant operation. A breathtaking view awaits you on the last floor!
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/ardennes.html
Éislek: adventure awaits
To the north of the Grand Duchy lies the tourist region of the Éislek, also known as the Ardennes in French and Ösling in German. The region is a genuine treasure trove for outdoor adventure enthusiasts and home to two nature reserves as well as Luxembourg's largest lake. The Éislek also offers an invitation to step back in time and explore its castles and places of remembrance of the Second World War.
Éislek, adventures in nature and remembrance tourism
An outdoor haven for adventure lovers, the Éislek region invites you to embrace nature in all its beauty. Actually, two Luxembourg natural reserves are situated in this region. In the south-west lies theNaturpark Öewersauern; its landscape is marked by the river Sûre and the Upper Sûre lake. It is the perfect location for water-based sports and leisure activities. In the north, theNaturpark Ouris characterised by its ever-changing landscapes, ranging from a vast plateau to narrow valleys carved out of the rock. In this reserve, adventure enthusiasts are spoilt for choice with countless hiking trails to suit all levels of fitness.
The Luxembourg Ardennes is also a location of historical remembrance. The Second World War marked one of the darkest chapters in the Grand Duchy's history. In the final months of the conflict, theBattle of the Bulgeravaged the north of the country, leaving scars that are still visible today. With its various monuments, museums and trails, the region is an exceptional point of interest for remembrance tourism.
Éislek & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to explore the Éislek
Exploring nature on foot
If you love long-distance trails, Éislek is the place to be:
If you enjoy hiking, but preferless demanding trails, you can also do so in the Eislek. In fact, the region hasover 200 trailswith clear, uniform signposts and plenty of information boards.
Discover nature with your feet in the water
If you're more of anaquatic adventurer, then head for the Lac de la Haute-Sûre. you can enjoy a wide range of activities and also relax in the authorised swimming areas.
Exploring local heritage: castles and culture
The Éislek region is enlightening andenriching with castles, festivals and UNESCO-labelled culture. Here is a selection of the places to visit and activities to enjoy:
A look back at history: remembrance tourism
Places of remembrance help us to better understand history and how the past has shaped our modern times. There are many such examples in the Éislek region and each one highlights the importance of peace and mutual understanding. Here is a small selection:
Last update22.11.2024
For more information
Mullerthal: fascinating geology and traditions
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/mullerthal.html
Mullerthal: fascinating geology and traditions
The Mullerthal region, known as Mëllerdall in Luxembourgish, lies in eastern Luxembourg. It is often referred to as Luxembourg's Little Switzerland. The region offers an enchanting blend of natural and cultural heritage and has two UNESCO labels: the hopping procession and theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall.Discover the Mullerthal's awe-inspiring geology and fairytale castles.
Mullerthal, UNESCO-labelled nature and traditions
The Mullerthal is famed for the diversity of its natural and geological heritage – it is home to astonishing rock formations and an outstanding biotope. This natural heritage can be explored in the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall nature park, part of the UNESCO Global Geoparks network.
Echternach, the region's capital and the country's oldest town, is home to one of the most popular traditions in Luxembourg: the hopping procession orSprangpressessioun, which is on UNESCO's Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage.
The region also has a wealth of historical sites and castles – it really is the perfect place for anyone looking for fascinating culture and good food.
Éislek & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to explore the Mullerthal
Exploring the natural environment
Hiking is the perfect wayto dive into the region's natural treasures, especially in theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall:
The Mullerthal Trail has been awarded the Leading Quality Trails – Best of Europe label by the European Hiking Federation.
You can alsoexplore the Mullerthal by bike:
Exploring the region's heritage
The town of Echternachhas long been a cultural crossroads. It is a great place for anyone interested in ancient history and traditions. Here is a selection of our favourite activities:
The region also hasseveral castles, including:
Last update28.01.2026
For more information
Éislek: adventure awaits
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/moselle.html
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
The Moselle region, known asd'Muselby Luxembourgers, lies in the east of Luxembourg. It takes its name from the river that forms the natural border between Luxembourg and Germany. The river is not a dividing line; it is an area of union between two neighbouring countries that reflects the region's European character. With its mild climate, the Moselle valley also has a long tradition of wine production and offers a wide range of wine-related activities.
Moselle: the perfect blend of wine and European spirit
Across the 42 km that the Moselle river flows through from Schengen to Wasserbillig, it crafted a hilly landscape, cut out of limestone, representing an ideal birthplace for viticulture. In fact, the valley has always been known for its wine-making tradition: the Celts, Gauls and then the Romans already grew vines! The Moselle vineyards underwent significant development and diversification in the 20th century, especially with the introduction of the Appellation d'origine contrôlée - Moselle luxembourgeoise (protected designation of origin). The region is particularly renowned for theproduction of white wines, both still and sparkling. It is also known for itsregional specialities, such as the late-harvested wine, the straw wine and the ice wine.
The region also has a decidedly European flavour. Schengen is a small village on the Moselle that has played a key role in the creation of Europe as we know it today. When France, Germany and the Benelux countries signed a first agreement in Schengen in 1985, they committed to abolishing controls at their internal borders. The idea took hold and was gradually expanded to the 27 countries that currently make up the Schengen Area.
Guttland, Moselle & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to explore the Moselle region
Wine tourism: vineyard hikes, tastings and festivals
The principle behind the guided vineyard hikes offered by the regional Tourist Information Centre is tocombine nature walks with wine tasting. Here is a small selection:
You can also go onhikes on your own or as a familyand book a tasting with one of themany wine producers dotted across the region.
The Moselle valley hosts severaltraditional wine-themed events. These include:
Discovering culture and history: from the Romans to the European Union
The Moselle has awealth of cultural heritage linked to its history, which you can learn about by visiting historical sites and museums, including:
Explore nature: on foot, by bike... and on the water
Although the Moselle valley is inevitably dominated by vines,the region has a surprising variety of natural landscapes, which can be explored on foot or by bike. Here are some ideas:
Water sports enthusiasts will also enjoy visiting the region in summer:
Take the time to relax
With a mild climate all year round and extensive facilities and activities, the Moselle is also the perfect place to come and relax. Here are some ideas:
Come and visit the Moselle, a wonderfully varied region without borders!
Last update02.03.2026
For more information
Mullerthal: fascinating geology and traditions
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Éislek: adventure awaits
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/capital.html
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Luxembourg's capital is a multicultural city brimming with fascinating contrasts. The upper town is home to the historic and traditional quarter The Kirchberg Plateau on the other side of the Alzette valley is the up-to-date contemporary headquarters of many European, cultural and financial institutions. Luxembourg city is a cosmopolitan town where 169 nationalities live side by side, multilingual culture abounds on every street corner and the green spaces invite you to sit back and relax.
Luxembourg, an international city with a rich history
Visiting Luxembourg City is like time-travelling. The Grand Duchy may be small - 2,586 km2 for almost672.050 inhabitants -, but it has a particularly rich history and the capital is a real compendium of European history
Luxembourg was founded in 963when the Ardennes Count Siegfried built a castle ('Lucilinburhuc', literally: small castle) on the Bock cliff, around which a fortified city would grow over the centuries. Modified and reinforced countless times during centuries of foreign domination, the fortress of Luxembourg was once one of the largest in Europe. Were you aware of the fact that, with a reputation of being impregnable, the fortress city became known abroad as the 'Gibraltar of the North'?
In terms of modern history, Luxembourg was one of the founding countries of the current European Union.In 1952, the capital became the temporary headquarters of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the first capital of Europe. Luxembourg City is the birthplace of Robert Schuman, and together with Brussels and Strasbourg, it is the third European capital and plays host to most of the European institutions.
Nestled in the heart of Western Europe and now home to169 different nationalities, Luxembourg City is eminently cosmopolitan and multilingual.It's easy to relax in the Grand Duchy, even if you are only here for a few days.
City of Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to explore the City of Luxembourg
Discover our heritage on foot or by bike
Since 1994, the bastions and the old town have featured on theUNESCO World Heritagelist, and there are a number of routes to explore these historical wonders:
You can also find out more about the city's history by exploring its underground passageways. With kilometre after kilometre of tunnels, theBock casematesand thePétrusse casematesare definitely worth a visit.
TheGodchaux circular walkcombines industrial history and a forestry walk. It takes you back to the early days of industrialisation in the area surrounding Luxembourg City. The tour covers 3km of the Alzette valley in 2 hours and focuses in particular on the local textile industry.
Lovers ofcontemporary architecture and art in the public spherecan make the most of an architectural walk around the Kirchberg plateau with up to 60 points of interest to discover in 2 to 3 hours.
Discover history and art in the museums
If the weather is unpredictable, you can always immerse yourself in history and art in one of the capital's museums:
With its national collections of archaeology, history and art, theNationalmusée um Fëschmaartpresents  exhibitions in a building that embodies the value of our heritage and incorporates several underground levels.
Discover music and the performing arts
If you fancy an evening filled with culture, check out the theatres and concert halls, which reflect the capital's cosmopolitan and multilingual character. There are many cultural venues to visit - here is a small selection:
Explore the markets and discover local products
If you are wandering through town on Wednesday or Saturday morning, theStater Maartis the place to be! Located on Place Guillaume, in the centre of the upper town, you'll find around 40 stalls selling regional and seasonal produce, organic produce, fruit and vegetables, bakery and pastry products, meat, roast chicken, pasta, cheese and much more!
Also, theGlacismaartis the ideal location for foodies and bargain-hunters on a Sunday. As well as a wide range of food products, you’ll also find flea market stalls and entertainment for the youngest members of the family.
When you've purchased your picnic essentials or tasted the local delicacies and need a moment to unwind, we recommend a stroll around the local parks and gardens.
Relaxing in the parks and gardens
Did you know that one quarter of Luxembourg City's 5,173 hectares are covered by green spaces? The capital's parks and gardens are ideal places to take a break from exploring the city, for example:
Furthermore,just a stone's throw from Luxembourg city,BambëschandGréngewaldmake up the largest wooded area in the country. These forests have signposted paths as well as fitness and cross-country trails for joggers and walkers alike. They are easily accessible viapublic transport.
Last update14.04.2025
For more information
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Minett: where the industrial past shapes the future
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/minett-red-rocks.html
Minett: where the industrial past shapes the future
TheMinettregion is located in the south of the country and is also known as the Land of the Red Rocks. It owes its name to the bright red iron ore deposits which were at the heart of the success of the iron and steel industry in Luxembourg in the industrial era. The region, which has transformed its historical assets into resources for the present and future, boasts a magnificent industrial heritage. Today, it has become the country's hub for scientific innovation. In addition, its cosmopolitan cities are teeming with culture and the unspoilt countryside has been awarded the UNESCO label.
Minett: from industrial heritage to unexpected wonders
Minettis a region heavily influenced by its industrial past, notablythe extraction of iron ore - the "minette" that lends its name to the region - and the production of iron and steel. Following the discovery of mineral deposits in the 1840s,Luxembourg embarked on its industrial revolution.The iron industry was the backbone of the Luxembourg economy until the crisis in the 1970s. This rapid industrialisation and subsequent de-industrialisation have left their mark on the landscape and towns. By making the most of the material traces of these changes, the region has gone from being an industrial enclave toan unexpected tourist destination, rich in industrial heritage and unique natural landscapes, which includes the Minett UNESCO Biosphere.
Immigration has played a key role in Luxembourg's economic boom, and immigrants still make up a significant share of the population, particularly in this region. This is clearly visible in itscosmopolitan and multilingual towns, as well as in thebroad range of cultural offerings that draw their influences from the melting pot of the modern-dayMinettregion.
Minett (Video/Audio YouTube)
Explore theMinett
Uncover its industrial heritage
The Regional Tourist Office offers theMinett Tour, a unique selection of ninesites with close ties to Luxembourg's steel-making past. Here is a small selection:
LIBRE ACCÈS: Belval, an ambitious urban project on a European scale (Video/Audio YouTube)
Meet the people behind the industry: migration
Industrialisation has also changed the demographic and social fabric of the country.Following the discovery of ore deposits in the south, farmers in the north left their land to work in the mines and factories. However, the local workforce proved inadequate to meet the needs of the industry and Luxembourg became a country of immigration from the 1890s onwards. There are several waves of immigration: The first to arrive were the Germans, then the Italians and finally, in the 1960s, the Portuguese.
It was thanks to these immigrants that Luxembourg enjoyed its industrial boomand associated economic growth. If you'd like to find out more about the lives of these immigrants, here are a few tips:
Explore the local area on foot or by bike
In its transformation from industrial enclave to tourist destination, the region has also managed to showcase its unique natural landscape. It offers nature and adventure enthusiasts a chance to explore the great outdoors.
The former mines, which can be explored on foot or by bike, have flourished into biodiversity hotspots, and are now home to an astonishing array of orchids, butterflies, wild bees and birds. The importance of this ecosystem is such that it has been classified as a biosphere reserve by UNESCO: theMinett UNESCO Biosphere. Enjoy it responsibly and stay on the official paths to avoid disturbing the delicate balance of the flora and fauna.
Minett Unesco Biosphere (Video/Audio YouTube)
Admire cosmopolitan cities and culture
Culture, innovation and the restoration of local heritage are intimately linked in the region. This concept is evident in thedynamic cultural life and the modern, alternative sitesthat encourage people to embrace culture and the arts. Here is a small selection:
However, if you're looking for an open-air cultural treat, you can't beat theEsch-sur-Alzette architectural walk!
Last update17.02.2026
For more information
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/guttland.html
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
The tourist region of Guttland lies in the centre and west of Luxembourg. Its name is evocative of its most characteristic feature - the good land - which is a tribute to its fertile soils.  It also offers an open invitation to leave everyday stress behind and embrace slow tourism along hundreds of kilometres of footpaths and bicycle paths. Castles, Gallo-Roman ruins, rural museums, unspoilt landscapes with hidden treasures and local gastronomy await you with open arms in the heart of the Grand Duchy.
Guttland, an invitation to slow down
Slow travel is the antithesis of traditional tourism. Instead of rushing from one famous landmark to another in a crowd of tourists, the idea of slow travel is to explore the areas off the beaten track in a more conscious, unhurried manner.
Slow tourism has become the motto of this region, which offersslow cyclingtours,slow tripsand the (re)discovery of thehidden treasuresand traditions.
In Guttland, slow travel also meanshigh-quality gastronomy. Local produce from the region's fertile soils is given pride of place on menus. There is a wide range of culinary options, including small brasseries as well as Michelin-starred restaurants.
Guttland, Moselle & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
Exploring Guttland
Discovering nature on foot
A host of walking trails await you. Here's a small selection below:
Cycling through Luxembourg's heritage and landscapes
Explore the scenic landscapes and fascinating culture of the region via one of the many leisurely bicycle paths. Here is a small selection, all starting at Useldange castle:
Castles and Roman villas: a journey through time
A trip to Guttland is a journey through time, from the prehistoric to the present day.
History enthusiasts can visit:
Guttland is a dream come true for castelophiles!The Eisch Valley, also known as theValley of the Seven Castles, is one of the country's major tourist attractions. It is named after its seven castles: Mersch, Schoenfels, Hollenfels, the old and new castles of Ansembourg, Septfontaines and Koerich.
Even today, these castles regularly come to life during the various markets and festivities held on site throughout the year.
TheValley of the Seven Castles can also be explored by carin one day. You can immerse yourself in 1,000 years of history, concentrated in an area of 25km, and enjoy a vast array medieval architecture, which is hard to find anywhere else in Europe.
Villages, traditions and local cuisine
Did you know that one of the country's most popular crafts originated in Guttland?The Péckvillercherare earthenware whistling birdsmade from clay and are displayed in Nospelt for theÉimaischenfolk festival on Easter Monday.
There are also a number of museums where you can discover the region's traditions, which are often linked to local produce and rural life:
If you're a fan oflocal beer and cuisine, take a culinary tour of Kleinbettingen, a village renowned for its cereals, which are exported across Europe. If you prefer your spirits or eaux-de-vie (in moderation, of course!), then tryLuxembourgishDrëppen,a name derived from the wordDrëps, which means drop or small quantity of liquid in Luxembourgish.
In the27 municipalities which form the Guttland, traditional local culture and modernity go hand-in-hand. We invite you to take a leisurely tour through this region and experience some unforgettable moments.
Last update20.05.2025
For more information
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Éislek: adventure awaits
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/water-activities.html
Water activities in Luxembourg: cool off in lakes, rivers and swimming pools
Summer, sun, water! When the temperatures rise, Luxembourg becomes the perfect destination for anyone wanting to cool off in or around the water. Whether you're after an active adventure, a family day out or some relaxing time in nature – with its many lakes, rivers and swimming pools, the country offers countless ways to enjoy the water in all its forms, whether to explore, play or unwind.  In this article, you will find a selection of the best water activities the Grand Duchy has to offer. Let's dive right in!
Be it a tranquil swim in nature or the thrill of a waterslide – water lovers of all ages are sure to find what they’re looking for in Luxembourg. The Grand Duchy boasts a wide variety of lakes and open-air pools for swimming, sunbathing and relaxing.
There are four idyllic natural swimming spots where you can cool off in nature:In the far north of the country, thelakes of Weiswampachoffer a family-friendly atmosphere and a variety of nearby hiking trails, making them a great place for an excursion. In the Mullerthal region, the area aroundEchternach Lakeoffers not just swimming, but a whole host of other leisure activities – from a bike park and climbing hall to a Roman villa. For outdoor enthusiasts, theUpper Sûre reservoir lake, nestled in the picturesque landscape of the Upper Sûre Nature Park, is the perfect retreat. In addition to a wide range of water sports, many outdoor activities invite you to relax and unwind. And the best part: afree shuttle servicetakes you to the most beautiful spots—without the hassle of parking. In the south, the Remerschen lakes, known as "Baggerweieren", welcome visitors with spacious sunbathing areas, barbecue zones and sports facilities. And four-legged friends are equally well looked after: a dedicated dog beach provides the perfect place for them to play and cool off by the water.
Those who prefer the facilities of a traditionaloutdoor poolwill be spoilt for choice in Luxembourg. TheGrevenmacher open-air pooloffers magnificent views of the Moselle river. InVianden, you can swim while taking in the picturesque views of the castle and surrounding valley. And in the south, the modernAquasudleisure complex in Differdange boasts a wide variety of water and sports facilities across an area of 10,000 square metres.You can find a full listof all indoor and outdoor poolshere.
SUP, wakeboarding and water skiing
Time to hit the board! One water sport that has surged in popularity in recent years isstand-up paddleboarding (SUP). Whether you prefer a relaxing glide across the surface or a more demanding workout to test your balance and fitness, SUP is a versatile summer activity that can now be enjoyed at more and more locations across Luxembourg. If you don't have your own board, SUP equipment can be rented at the lakes inEchternachandRemerschenand at theUpper Sûre reservoir lake in Lultzhausen, with introductory sessions available to help you get started. Boards can also be hired on theRiver Sûre– inDillingen,Wallendorf-PontandRosport.
For those craving a bit more action,wakeboardingandwater skiingare just the ticket. Whether beginner or experienced, theMosellepromises plenty of fun for thrill-seekers – all in a mild climate and set against a stunning backdrop of rolling vineyards. InGrevenmacherandEhnen, you can book not only conventional wakeboarding and water skiing sessions, but also try outwakesurfing,barefoot water skiingandmonoskiing.
Hold on tight! As a splashy and fun alternative for all ages, hop on abanana boat– a bright yellow, banana-shaped inflatable pulled along by a speedboat. You can try this exhilarating water ride inRosport.
Canoeing and kayaking
To see Luxembourg from a whole new perspective this summer, take to the water in acanoe or kayak. TheRiver Sûreis the perfect setting for a relaxed paddling tour. With its gentle current and the picturesque backdrop of Natura 2000 conservation areas, it is ideal for nature lovers and explorers alike. Several entry points and rental stations are located betweenWallendorf-Pont,DillingenandRosport. A tour on the river combines exercise, tranquillity and nature, far away from the hustle and bustle – whether you’re paddling solo, as a pair or in a group.
Paddling fans will also find plenty of options at theUpper Sûre reservoir lake. Theyouth hostel in Lultzhausenoffers canoeing and kayaking activities for both children and adults. Whether alone or on a guided tour, this is a wonderful place to immerse yourself in nature. One particular highlight is theEarly Bird Kayak Tour, on which you can watch the sunrise from the water.
Craving more adrenaline? InDiekirch, experienced kayakers can put their skills to the test on awhitewater coursewith fast currents. You will need tobook in advanceand bring yourown equipment.
Boat trips
All aboard! On a sceniccruiseaboard theM.S. Marie-Astrid,theRoude Léiwor the RiverDiva, guests can take in the stunning Moselle landscape while enjoying a glass or two of the local wine. If you feel the need for speed,powerboatsoffer a thrilling way to explore the region from the water. You will need a boating licence and your own boat for this, as there are no rental boats available on the Moselle.
In the north of the country, theUpper Sûre reservoir lakeoffers visitors a truly special experience: asolar-powered boatthat lets you explore Luxembourg’s largest drinking water reservoir and its surrounding nature in a sustainable and environmentally friendly way.
If you prefer to take things at a more leisurely pace and power the boat yourself,pedal boatsare available to rent in many parts of the Grand Duchy. Pedalos can be hired at the lakes inEchternach, Weiswampach and Remerschen, among other places.
Fishing
Luxembourg’s waters are teeming with species such as trout, pike, zander, eel and carp, making it a great destination for a successfulfishing trip. You can fish not only at various lakes and ponds, but also along most of the country’s rivers. Anyone wanting to cast their rod will need a valid permit: theinland fishing licence, as well as theborder fishing licencefor fishing in waters bordering Germany,can be applied for easily online.
Diving
Diving in Luxembourg? Absolutely! The Grand Duchy might not seem like yourtypical diving destination, but it offers some surprisingly exciting options. At theUpper Sûre reservoir lake, divers can reach depths of up to 32 metres, where native fish, old walls, bridges and even a replica of the Gëlle Fra await – deliberately placed underwater along with other sculptures and figures for divers to explore. With depths of 4 to 5 metres, the public lake inRemerschenis perfect for training dives and beginners.
Numerousdiving clubsacross the country regularly offer trial dives, weekly training sessions and internationally recognised certification courses.
Last update04.03.2026
For more information
News
Wellness: magical moments of well-being and relaxation
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Cruises on the Moselle river
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/minett-trail-tourism-luxembourg.html
Minett Trail: 11 lodges to discover the region
Are you a fan of walking and hiking? The Minett Trail is the perfect way to discover the landscapes of Luxembourg's Red Rocks region, combining industrial heritage with stunning nature. And there are several options for overnight stays along the route –  a total of 11 lodges are available for visitors, offering the opportunity to experience the beauty of the region's famous red rocks from a whole new perspective.
The Minett Trail in a nutshell
The Minett Trail walking route crosses11 municipalities, which together form the Pro-Sud syndicate. The trail wasdeveloped in part thanks to a competition held for Esch2022and also in connection with the Minett UNESCO Biosphere project, on the initiative ofPro-Sudand theOrder of Architects and Consulting Engineers (OAI).
The Minett Trail will delight walkers of all levels and is widely accessible. On foot or by bike, it is the perfect place to experience the joys of slow tourism and enjoy bucolic walks against an impressive natural backdrop. The trail offers a remarkable variety of contrasting landscapes, with scenery as diverse as it is breathtaking: rocky remains, outstanding plant life, varied topography and former mining sites, all in a mild microclimate home to outstanding biodiversity.
And to top it all off, a series oflodges can be found all the way along the 90km route. The lodges are brimming with originality and creativity as evidenced by the construction material, layout or location. For example, there's a floating lodge on a lake near the water tower in Dudelange, pop-up mobile lodges in Esch-sur-Alzette, a lodge inside a former water basin in Schifflange and an old railway carriage for travellers at the Fond-de-Gras in Pétange.
What can you see along the Minett Trail?
Cross Luxembourg's southern region at your own pace and discover the flora and fauna that have taken over the former mining sites. You don't have to complete the entire Minett Trail in one go – that's why the route is divided into several stages. There are relatively short sections such as the 6km walks between Belval and Esch-sur-Alzette or Schifflange and Bergem, as well as hikes of up to 16km like the stretch between Pétange and Differdange, so you can enjoy the beautiful natural scenery as it suits you best.
The entire trail, which goes from Clemency to Dudelange, gives you an insight into a key part of Luxembourg's heritage: the history of the steel industry, which shaped the economy, society and especially the landscape of the Red Rocks region in the south of the country.The 90km route is divided into ten stages, featuring former quarries, mine entrances, buggis – the mine carts used to transport iron ore out of the mines –, former electric pylons or even disused railway stations that have been turned into cafés.
In the region's rich and varied natural landscapes,there is an abundance of bird and animal life: you can see storks, lapwings, water buffalo, kites, and if you're very lucky you might catch a glimpse of some of the bats that now live in the former mines.
One of the best known illustrations of the bygone industrial era is the Belval site, once a jewel in the crown of Luxembourg's steel industry and now a shining example of urban conversion.The Belval blast furnaces are well worth a visit– they are now a unique tourist and cultural site. The journey back in time along the Minett Trail also takes you toRumelange, home to theNational Mining Museum, andKayl, where you can see themonument to miners.
The signposts along the Minett Trail guide you to other important sites from the industrial era, like Esch-sur-Alzette – known as the Iron Metropolis –, and Differdange, Schifflange and Dudelange.
Staying along the Minett Trail
Since it is impossible to cover the entire Minett Trail in one go, the municipalities offer a number of places to stay along the way.A total of 11 lodges have been created on the route, either making use of existing structures or built from scratch.
Each stage on the trail includes at least one lodge (Kabaischen), where you can spend the night before setting off again the next morning.
Discover how the 11 lodges were created!
The Minett Trail lodges are the result of an architectural competition launched by theOrdre des architectes et ingénieurs-conseilsand Pro-Sud. The idea for the competition arose in 2019 as part of the Pro-Sud communes' application to UNESCO to become a biosphere reserve. A total of 91 concepts were submitted for the 11 sites.
If you like architecture, the book "Gîtes Minett Trail - Concours OAI/Pro-Sud" offers a complete overview of the competition, from the initial idea to the finished lodges.
Last update18.03.2026
For more information
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/top-5-long-trails.html
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Did you know that every region in Luxembourg can be explored on foot via a long hiking route? The routes follow the same philosophy as other long-distance trails; they are beloved by long-distance walkers and can be used for multi-day or multi-week hiking trips on waymarked paths. So fill your water bottle, pull on your hiking boots and follow us across the country!
EscapardenneÉislekTrail
If you fancy exploring thelow mountains of the Ardenneson either side of theBelgium-Luxembourg border, this106kmtrail is a fantastic option. TheÉislekTrailhas been awarded the Leading Quality Trails – Best of Europe certificate by the European Ramblers Association.
The Ardennes region is a delightful combination of wide open spaces and hidden gems: vast meadows, sunken valleys, winding streams and dry stone walls – the art of which is on the national inventory ofintangible cultural heritage.
The EscapardenneÉislekTrail is organised intofive stages, each around 20km long. The first two stages take place entirely in Luxembourg (Kautenbach-Clervaux-Asselborn); the third stage (Asselborn-Houffalize) passes into Belgium; and stages four and five (Houffalize-Nadrin-La Roche-en-Ardenne) remain in Belgium.Out of a total of 106km, roughly 50km of the trail is in Luxembourg. Waymark 265 on stage 3 indicates the point at which the trail crosses the Belgian border.
Thededicated websitepresents each stage in detail: the length, positive and negative elevation, difficulty of the trail and points of interest along the way. It also has a list ofaccommodationeither along the route or nearby – providing you with all the information you need to organise your hike in advance!
Mullerthal Trail
The112kmMullerthal Trail, the top hiking trail inLuxembourg's Little Switzerland, is a great way of experiencing the imposing rocks that characterise the region. The trail has also been awarded the Leading Quality Trails – Best of Europe label.
The route is composed of three loops, each with their own distinct character:
The three loops that form the Mullerthal Trail can also be covered insix shorter stages,ranging from 13km, the shortest, to 25km, the most demanding. In any case, expect to spend much of your day walking, between 5 and 9 hours depending on the weather and how well prepared you are.
Do you want to explore the region even further? Then why not try theMullerthal Trail Extra Tour A, B, C and D.
Advice to help you plan your trip can be found on theMullerthal Trail website, including suggestions for accommodation in Beaufort, Berdorf and Scheidgen.
Important: Some sections of the trails may be muddy, difficult to pass or damaged, and therefore temporarily diverted. To find out more about the condition of the routes, contact the region'stourist information centresbefore setting off!
Move, we carry
Do you fancy tackling a multi-day hike but without the hassle of taking your luggage with you? There is a solution:Move, we carry.
This is a luggage transport service for anyone wishing to explore Luxembourg in stages. It is available for individuals – hikers and cyclists – and travel professionals. The luggage is picked up after 10 a.m. from any paid accommodation in Luxembourg and delivered to the next accommodation point by 4 p.m. at the latest on the same day. Hikers and cyclists can set off for the day safe in the knowledge that their luggage is following them at a distance.
Book the service online and make sure you check out the latest information on the Move, we carry website.
National hiking trail: Valley of the Seven Castles
Thenational hiking trailfrom Mersch to Koerich takes you through the Eisch Valley and introduces you to the history of theGuttland regionthrough its castles. The trail is 'just'37kmlong and is a great opportunity to engage in slow tourism, the region's motto, while still getting out and about in the fresh air.
Experienced hikers will be able to cover the entire trailin a single day. But if you want to take a more relaxed approach to the Valley of the Seven Castles and combine your walk with local history, you can split the route intosmall stages between the castles:
If you are on the lookout for even more castles, make sure you check out ourtop 5 walking trails around castles.
MinettTrail
TheMinettTrailoffers90kmof fascinating walks through theLand of the Red Rocks, a region whose industrial past has left its mark on nature and society. This regional trail links all the major towns in southern Luxembourg, together with the region's tourist areas and historical sites, in a single route.
The route is divided intoeleven stagesthat you can follow at your own pace depending on the areas you are interested in and your level of fitness. Experienced hikers can join several stages together to cover a daily distance of 20km to 30km.
From Esch-sur-Alzette there are two alternative routes: one to Bettembourg (three stages covering a total of 20km) and another to Dudelange (three further stages covering a total of 30km). Download yourmaps and bookletshere!
At the end of each day's walk, treat yourself to a good night's rest in one of the fully renovated quirkyhiking lodges(orKabaisercher) along the trail. Some of the lodges are still being renovated but the region also has plenty of alternative accommodation options.
Interested in finding out more about the cross-border history between France and Luxembourg? Then set out on thiscross-border steel-themed circuitto find out just how much the two border regions are closely linked by their industrial past. The21.5kmcircular route ismedium difficultyand should takewalkers around 5 hours 50 minutes.
Moselle3 Trail
The33kmMoselle3 Trailtakes visitors through the cross-border region along theMosellebetween France, Germany and Luxembourg and explores its shared history: the war years, border shifts, geopolitical conflicts and joint agreements, all of which left a lasting impact on the region and the mindset of local residents.
The trail passes through outstanding natural sites, some of which are listed nature reserves, including Stromberg and Hammelsberg, the chalk grasslands of Montenach and the quartzite outcrops in Sierck-les-Bains.
The trail is inone single stage; thedifficulty level is medium because there is a cumulative elevation gain of approximately 960m. The route starts and finishes at the European Museum in Schengen, an iconic town in the region's history known for the agreements named after it.
A little anecdote
In 2021, Luxembourg acquired the boatMS Princesse Marie-Astrid, on which the Schengen Agreement was signed in 1985. The boat had been sailing for some years under the name MS Regensburg, taking tourists on trips down the Danube. The Grand Duchy converted this boat into an exhibition and performance space, and also built a new quay in Schengen. The boat is kept riverworthy and docked in Schengen near the European Museum. It will be able to travel across Europe for special events.
Bonus track: Schengen-Rombach, the Luxembourg section of the E3 European long-distance path
If you are after a more adventurous hiking trail, you might be interested to know that theE3 European long-distance pathcrosses Luxembourg, from Schengen (Moselle) to Rombach (Guttland), running along the German border for nearly 70km.
The E3 crosses Spain, France, Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania and Bulgaria, covering a total of 6,950km, with around 150km in Luxembourg.
European long-distance pathslink European countries from North Cape to Crete and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Carpathian Mountains and the Black Sea. There are 12 E-paths, labelled E1 to E12. They are waymarked and maintained by the European Ramblers Association.
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/top-5-walking-trails-castles.html
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Do you fancy combining a visit to a castle in Luxembourg with a walk in the countryside? Luxembourg has an extensive network of local trails and easy walking routes, many of which are suited to people of all ages and abilities.
From the New Castle of Ansembourg to Hollenfels Castle
The grounds of theNew Castle of Ansembourgare a must-see in summer, especially during the Castle Festival, which this year takes place on Sunday 7th August. Once you have finished looking around the gardens, why not take a walk to Hollenfels, just 1.6km away?
And from Hollenfels, you can follow thecircular walk, which takes you into the valley of the Eisch, a Belgian-Luxembourg river, to the mouth of the Kalbaach and past Neimillen mill. The circular walk is9.4kmlong with acumulative elevation gain of more than 150m, so we would advise taking it gently.
And while you're in Hollenfels, why not visit itscastletoo? Perched on a rocky outcrop at 315m above sea level, it has a keep, an angular tower, a curtain wall and a main residence. A stone bridge takes visitors to the castle over the moat. The imposing building now houses the youth hostel and the Melting Pot restaurant.
Exploring the Mullerthal from Beaufort castles
Summer is the perfect season to go to Beaufort because the two castles are open to visitors:the Renaissance castle and the mediaeval castle.
After learning about the history of the castles, if you want to explore the Mullerthal region we would recommend theB14 local hiking trail. This walk will introduce you to some of the rock formations that are typical of Luxembourg's Little Switzerland. The5.3kmtrail, with acumulative elevation gain of 60m, takes you through woodland and past the remains of the former ramparts and the little Klaisgen chapel. This is an easy hike that offers a great introduction to theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall.
If you want an even gentler stroll, opt for theB16 local hiking trail,4.3km longand with just35m of cumulative elevation gain. The route is almost completely paved and can be walked with a pram.
Geoportal, the comprehensive platform for geographical data about Luxembourg
Geoportail.luis the official platform for geographical data and information about Luxembourg. One of the main aims is to represent the geodata content in the form of maps, with hundreds of layers of data covering a wide variety of different subjects.
Thetourism mapsare a great tool to prepare hikes: they indicate length and elevation gain and can be exported as CSV, KML and GPX files or even printed. Make sure you check out this fantastic open data tool offered by the Land Registry and Topography Administration!
A riverside walk along the Our from Vianden Castle
Vianden Castlein north-eastern Luxembourg is undoubtedly one of the country's most iconic landmarks. And by taking a walk in the surrounding area you can admire the imposing architecture of this fairytale castle from every angle.
TheVI 1 – Vianden trailis an idyllic5.3kmroute along the river Our, with acumulative elevation gain of more than 100m. After walking through the forest, you will join historical footpaths towards the castle, then head down towards the old fortified tower and the current bell tower, the Hockelsturm.
If you're after a more challenging route, though still relatively accessible, you can choose between theVI 2 – Vianden trail(5.86km, 200m cumulative elevation gain) andVI 3 – Vianden trail(9.35km, 400m cumulative elevation gain). Whichever you choose, bear in mind that you are in the Luxembourg Ardennes region, which is generally more hilly than other regions in the country.
Wiltz: from castle to gardens
The northern town of Wiltz is another perfect summer destination – you can visit thecastleand also enjoy thefestival, which was launched in 1953.
For an enjoyable walk around the town, we would recommend theWI 4 local hiking trail. The6.5kmroute takes you from Wiltz Castle to the surrounding woodland. On the way back, Wiltz Garden awaits, a beautiful space that has been artistically landscaped. It may be a short route but there is acumulative elevation gain of around 200m: we are in the Ardennes, after all!
Koerich, gateway to the Valley of the Seven Castles
Surrounded by towering forests and pastureland, the village of Koerich and its lowlandcastleare in the centre-west of the country, at the start of the Valley of the Seven Castles.
TheKoerich circular walk,7.9kmlong with acumulative elevation gain of around 140m, is full of hidden treasures. The route takes you straight to Fockemillen mill via Härebësch forest. From there, you walk along the river Eisch and the Giewelerbaach stream to Neimillen mill, before heading back to your starting point on the municipal car park near the castle.
Working towards a uniform signage for hiking paths in Luxembourg
Given the growing success of Luxembourg's hiking paths, a series of standards for signage and waymarking are being introduced in the country to meet the needs of tourists and locals alike. The aim is to achieve a comprehensive, continuous system of signposting that is unambiguous and clearly visible, with markings on trees, lamp posts, etc. The standards used correspond to those of the European Ramblers Association (ERA), of which Luxembourg is a founder member.
Last update11.03.2026
For more information
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/top5-extraordinary-activities-luxembourg.html
Top 5: extraordinary activities in Luxembourg
Would you like to explore a part of Luxembourg that you have not yet discovered? Are you interested in unique cultural trips and treasures? If you fancy visiting some of the less touristy and less crowded areas of Luxembourg, check out these recommendations. Here is our selection of five unusual places or activities in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Ride the UNESCO trail
If you are passionate about history and want to take advantage of the fresh air, then theUNESCO e-bike tourperfect for you! Combine arelaxing bike ride with a sight-seeing tour of the history of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
This short guided tour (which lasts about three hours) allows youto explore world heritage in the valley of the Petrusse, also known as the 'lower town' of Clausen and Pfaffenthal. On this cultural tour, you canstop and explore the 80 different sites, monuments and attractions.
UNESCO has created this 9.5km state-of-the-art electric bike tour to preserve, protect and showcase world heritage.
While you pedal, you canlisten to interesting stories and facts about the sites via the Sightseeing.lu app(your audio guide). This app is available in five languages (L, FR, DE, GB, NL).
An on-board computer is placed on the handlebars of the bicycle and is your tour guide! There's also a holder to attach your smartphone to the bike.
A visit to the Syndicat des Eaux du Sud
Are you looking for something unusual to do with your family or friends this summer? Look no further! The Syndicat des Eaux du Sud (SES)  is the ideal destinationif you’re looking for a good time and want to learn about one of the country's drinking water networks in a fun way.
Enjoy a guided tour of the site. You can also visit theinteractive exhibition on the history of the SES, which explains the water cycles and the problem of virtual water. One part of the exhibition focuses on the impact of drinking water on the quality of human life, global conflicts and the environment.
Also, you can enjoy a wide range of activities, such as avisiting a spring, touring the SES facilities and exploring theRebiergreservoirs. The tour is divided into three parts and takes three hours.
At present, 22 member municipalities are part of the syndicate. The total length of the SES network is 213 km.
Delve into the Roman heritage of the Moselle
If you are a keen admirer of the vestiges of ancient civilisations, then don’t miss the Roman heritage of the Moselle!
Luxembourg isdotted with Gallo-Roman sites and there was a major Roman presence in Moselle region, to which numerous architectural ruins bear witness.
There are several Gallo-Roman archaeological sites (inDalheim,GrevenmacherandLellig), where you can uncover all kinds of evidence of the country's Roman legacy:the Vicus Ricciacum amphitheatrewith a maximum capacity of 3,500 seats is one of the best preserved in this region. Other treasures also remain such as Roman statues, Roman funerary monuments and several other signs of the heritage of our predecessors.
In theMuselregion, you have the option to explore manyhistorical routes on foot, by bike or car. These routes traverse numerous archaeological sites, such as theRoman Road, which begins in Dalheim, or the Roman Trail, during which you can stop along the way to savour traditional Roman cuisine.
You can follow in the footsteps of the Romans as you wander through the beautiful vineyards.
And for lovers of fine wines – another Roman legacy –, theViamoselinitiative gives visitors the opportunity to explore the most exquisite examples of winemaking in this cross-border region.
A visit to the Slate Museum
Are you looking for an original and instructive experience? TheSlate Museum welcomes you with open arms! A visit to the Slate Museum in Haut-Martelange is like ajourney back in time. You'll learn all about the slate industry in the Greater Region in the 20th century. Also, a tour of the museum is guaranteed to foster your creativity!
The museum is located on aneight-hectare site and includes mines and other buildings. It offers lots of interesting activities, such as anindustrial train ride, a visit to the underground gallery, tasting a typical meal of a slate worker as well as different types of guided tours(organised by themes) andcreative workshops to suit all ages(engraving, airbrushing, holidays, etc.).
During your visit, you will learn all about the slate industry, starting with its extraction through to the finished product and its transport. For your descent into the mine don't forget to bring a jacket and sturdy shoes, even in summer. This industrial site, which has been gradually transformed into the Slate Museum, also includes the railway network. Discover the world of the Martelange slate quarries ona tour of the "Johanna" underground gallery and descend to a depth of -42m.
NeiSchmelzin Dudelange
Would you like toexplore a part of Luxembourg's iron and steel history? In which case, we recommend the city of Dudelange, it's truly amazing! TheNeiSchmelzproject, a highly innovative undertaking from an architectural perspective, is being carried out by the Fonds du logement (Housing Fund) on the former site of Arcelor's Laminoir Dudelange S.A. and involvesan interesting cultural approach. One of the main objectives of the project is to conserve the national cultural heritage.
This former industrial site is constantly changing. Let yourself be drawn into anartistic and architectural world and become actively involved in this process. For example,DKollageis a collective and participatory project aimed at renovating the old building, changing rooms and wagon workshop (VeWa).
Another example of conservation that showcases the cultural heritage in Dudelange is thewater tower, which houses theWaassertuermand thePomhouse.These two architecturally outstanding structures host a wide range ofcontemporary photography exhibitions.
TheCentre Culturel Régional DudelangeOpderschmelzand the Centre National de l'Audiovisuel (CNA) are located close byand house a music school, a cinema, a restaurant and a concert hall.
In the surrounding area, you can also visita rather unique lodge. It floats right in the middle of the cooling pond of the former steelworks in Dudelangeand is situated on the Minett Trail.
Last update17.02.2025
For more information
Regions
The best apps to discover Luxembourg
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/time-traveler-realite-virtuelle.html
Explore Luxembourg City in the Belle époque
Would you like to take a step back in time and take a walk through the narrow streets of Luxembourg City while exploring the capital's heritage and the commercial development from the Belle Époque to today? It's easy, just download the new 'The Luxembourg Time Traveler' app from the City of Luxembourg and take a journey back in time.
The new 'The Luxembourg Time Traveler' appis the perfect travel companion and enables users to discover the capital's heritage as well as the history of the City of Luxembourg in a fun and entertaining way.
The application literally drops its visitors into the meandering streets of the capital at the turn of the 20th century, thanks toaugmented reality technology. On the screen of their smartphone or tablet, users can then discover another reality that unfolds before their eyes - the City of Luxembourg during the Belle Époque.
The Luxembourg Time Traveler (Video/Audio YouTube)
The City of Luxembourg now has a new tool available allowing users to explore the capital's heritage in a fun and entertaining way. It is compatible with IOS and Android, and available free of charge in French, English and German in AR mode. Are you aware of the difference between AR and VR?
Augmented reality (AR)makes it possible to add virtual elements to reality, for example by displaying on a tablet historical photos of places visited during a historical tour.
Virtual reality (VR)provides access to a 3D world by using headphones and movement sensors.
A shopping trip through time
The 'Luxembourg Time Traveler' offers31 hotspots to discover, 13 of which are compatible with immersive reality. Using geolocation, the app recognises if the user is near one of the 31 points of interest. When one of these points of interest is in the field of the camera, the 
app superimposes the historical image over the real image. The user can find out about the places of interest and buildings via a digital interface which provides additional information.
The tour takes visitors through theUNESCO areas of Luxembourg Cityand accompanies them through the narrow streets where thesmall shopswere located at the start of the 20th century, a period when the city's economic and commercial development was in full swing.
The objective of the app is to attract visitors to lesser-known catchment areas and to provide information about the commercial history of buildings and squares in the city. A quiz and photos from the archives of the Photothèque (Photographic Archive) of the City of Luxembourg are also available on the Time Traveler menu.
Looking at the Grand Duchy in a different light
Virtual reality is making great advances and is becoming extremely popular with the general public. And for good reason, thisimmersive experienceallows users to take a tour of the Machu Picchu, travel down the Nile in Egypt and dive into the Pacific without leaving the comfort of their sofa. This new technology has been employed for several years, enabling users to wander through the old streets of the Luxembourg capital and its suburbs.
A virtual trip aboard the Pétrusse Express
Whilst on board thePétrusse Express, voyagers can enjoy animmersive experience in Pfaffenthal in 1867. Operating seven days a week and making eight one-hour trips a day, one of the three cars of the Pétrusse Express is equipped with 15 VR glasses. The current route is 1.2km long, which takes about 15 minutes on a virtual carriage dating back to 1867.
In the historic heart of Pfaffenthal
The Timetravel start-up offers its visitors avirtual journey through the capital in the 19th centuryon board their minibus, which can hold up to 30 passengers. It takes them on a trip through the historic quarter of the Pfaffenthal. The coachman, called Jos, explains to visitors the living conditions of local inhabitants shortly before Luxembourg's independence. The highlight of the visit is when visitors get on board the shuttle and put on the virtual reality glasses. The modern vehicle is then instantly transformed into a horse-drawn carriage, and the visitors can even feel the cobblestones beneath the wheels!
Last update11.04.2025
The best apps to discover Luxembourg
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
Musical activities for young people
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/luxembourg-tourism-award-winner-exploreo.html
Luxembourg Tourism Awards
And the winners are... The Luxembourg Tourism Awards highlight the art of hospitality and reward initiatives that enrich the visitor experience and enhance the country's appeal. These awards showcase the expertise and creativity that make Luxembourg shine.
Categories and winners
The third edition of theLuxembourg Tourism Awardstook place on 13 November 2025with the theme "Excellence and Innovation". With 51 projects in competition, it illustrated the diversity and vitality of Luxembourg's tourism sector.This edition highlighted the passion and entrepreneurial spirit of the candidates, while emphasising the essential role of volunteers, who are the true pillars of the tourism industry.
The 2025 winners are:
Good to know
Any organisation or individual active in tourism can take part in the competition. Thedifferent categorieshighlightthe dynamism, passion, creativity and entrepreneurial spiritwith which the participants are engaged. You can find the fullruleson the competition website.
Three questions for...
Priyanka Meena, Director of Operations and co-founder of Exploreo, winner of the "Best Innovation" award.
Congratulations! Exploreo has been recognised for its achievements in tourism innovation. What motivated you to enter the Luxembourg Tourism Awards, and how does this recognition fit in with your mission?
After spending a year developing Exploreo, we wanted to show Luxembourg what we were creating. This award confirms our belief that technology and sustainability can transform travel. It also helps us enormously when we talk to partners and investors, because being recognised as the best innovation gives our small team real credibility in a competitive market.
The Luxembourg Tourism Awards recognise initiatives that strengthen regional identity and tourism impact. How do you see Exploreo's contribution to local communities and destinations, and what role does this award play in amplifying your platform's influence?
We are launching a B2B partners programme to work directly with local providers, regional outdoor guides and small tour operators who have stories to share. We want to highlight Europe's outdoor adventures and slow travel itineraries that preserve the value of destinations. This award increases our visibility and supports the development of these partnerships.
Since its creation, Exploreo has positioned itself as a platform dedicated to eco-friendly and responsible travel. Looking ahead, what are your plans in terms of development, innovation or expansion that will further strengthen Exploreo's role as a leader in sustainable tourism?
We are working with Luxembourg institutions on a rigorous carbon methodology and developing AI-based sustainable travel tools. We are expanding our coverage of night trains. The goal is simple: to make Luxembourg a recognised hub for innovation in sustainable tourism, proving that responsible travel can be both easy and inspiring.
We would like to thank Priyanka Meena for granting us this interview.
Exploreo
Exploreo is a sustainable travel platform that allowsusersto book eco-friendly accommodation and activities, while automatically calculating and offsetting the carbon footprint of each stay.Each booking contributes to reforestation projects, and users can track the planting of their trees in a "virtual forest". The selection includes responsible hotels and cottages as well as local experiences that promote encounters with communities and the preservation of landscapes. The platform also protects privacy through secure servers.
Celebrating hospitality, culture and innovation
Every two years, the Directorate-General for Tourism organises the Luxembourg Tourism Awards to highlight the quality and diversity of the country's tourism offering. Cosmopolitan and located in the heart of Europe, Luxembourg is constantly striving to increase its attractiveness. A multidisciplinary jury selects projects that embody excellence: quality services, innovation and adaptation to the expectations of a diverse clientele. These awards encourage the sector to diversify its offerings and strengthen its role in the national sustainable tourism strategy. Each investment contributes to enriching the traveller experience, improving the daily lives of residents and enhancing Luxembourg's reputation as a responsible and innovative destination.
The best apps to discover Luxembourg
Rural accommodation: relax in the heart of the countryside
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Last update19.12.2025
For more information
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/tours-for-children.html
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Willing to discover the nature and biodiversity of the Grand Duchy with your family? Are you looking for excursion ideas for your children and their friends? Here is a selection of circular walks to entertain both young and old, while enhancing your knowledge along the way!
A journey through wonderland in theMinett
Who doesn't like to relive fairy tales and legends with the young members of the family? The town ofDifferdangehas created theMäerchenweenature trail with six landmarks sculpted in wood, each one depicting a scene from a fairy tale: Cinderella, Snow White, Pinocchio, etc. as well as Luxembourgish fairy tales such as "Klenge roude Léiw", byMireille Weiten-de Waha, and many more.
They are not just reference points but places to play: the sculpted landmarks offer various challenges for young children, such as climbing a wall with the help of Rapunzel's hair. Along the trail, forest animals sculpted from wood are hidden from sight. You can use the telescopes placed at various locations on the path to find them. But don't forget to bring your binoculars with you, just in case!
How can I get there? TheMäerchenweenature trail begins on rue Metzkimmert in Differdange. It offers1kmof unmissable entertainment; the trail is suitable for prams.
Explore nature with Robi, the forest elf, inÉislek
TheMam Robi duerch de Bëschwalking trail inHosingen, is ideal for young children. It allows them to play and explore the natural world at the same time, while working on their skills and aptitude. Along the3kmtrail, Robi the elf will join you on the watchtower to observe the animals and encourages children to test their balance on several rope courses.
Are you eager to find out more about the different species of trees? Then look no further! Thanks to the arboretum, you can test your newly acquired knowledge later on during a rally!
The starting point of the trail is located close to the Park Housen ecological and tourist centre in Hosingen.
To bee or not to bee... Learn all about bees in the City of Luxembourg
Un-bee-lievable moments in the Luxembourg capital! The City of Luxembourg recently launched abee walking trailof approximately2.5kmwhich showcases the characteristics of bees, bumblebees, hornets and wasps in an educational and fun way.
The 13 stages of theBeien an der Stadtrail gives children and adults the chance to learn about the differences between bees and wasps, find out how bees find their way around, and discover the basics on colonisation and pollination. The trail includes an opportunity to see a beehive for wild bees and experience the comings and goings of these diligent workers.
Thesignsare printed in French, German and English and provide detailed explanations about biodiversity in the city and the role that these vital insects play in the life of all living creatures. Furthermore, from May to September, the City of Luxembourg organisesguided tourslasting around2.5 hours. Participation is free of charge but registration is compulsory. Please check theCity of Luxembourgwebsite for more information.
Discover the wealth of biodiversity withJofferMargot in the Mullerthal
The imaginary teacher Joffer Margot and her friend the owl await you inConsdorfto raise awareness of the natural heritage and different biotopes in the Mullerthal. While walking along theJofferMargot educational nature trail, you'll learn about the significance of protecting our natural environment and discover, via 11 information panels, the biological wealth of the region, which often goes unnoticed. Dry stone walls, ponds, a forest filled with beech trees and even a bug hotel will provide unforgettable experiences for the whole family.
The trail has three different routes, each marked by different coloured pictograms, allowing you to adapt your trip to the age of your budding hikers. It takes about2 hoursto complete all three trails.
If you plan on going by car, the nearest car park is located at Konstrëfer Millen; if you plan on taking the bus, the stop is Consdorf-Konstrëfermillen, which is located 50m from the start of the trail.
When birds meet futuristic architecture on the Moselle
Did you know that theHaff Réimechnature reserveis the most species-rich wetland in Luxembourg? Despite only covering 0.1% of the total surface area of the country, 76% of the bird species detected in the Grand Duchy have been observed here. The ponds in the reserve are an important stopover point for many protected bird species during their migration. Without a doubt, this is the place to be if you are a bird lover and you want to pass on your passion to the younger members of your family, while introducing them to bird watching.
The Biodiversum Camille Gira nature centre and forestin Remerschen is located next to the reserve. This stunning building is an architectural masterpiece and houses interactive exhibits on topics such as bird and nature conservation. Also, it is the starting point of variousnature discovery trails; the trail around the pond is perfect forbird watching. Don't forget your binoculars! From one of the many observation huts, you might be able to spot the little ringed plover, the great crested grebe or the cuckoo. Children will love it!
The centre isopen from Tuesday to Sundayand entrance isfree of charge.Guided toursare also available on request in Luxembourgish, French, German and English. The tours from March to September are especially interesting as this is the period when many migratory birds pass through Luxembourg!
Biodiversum Nature and Forest Centre Camille Gira - Remerschen (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update05.03.2026
For more information
Activités pour enfants: aventures, culture et nature en famille
À la découverte du patrimoine naturel Unesco au Luxembourg
Luxembourg, un pays de châteaux
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/musical-activities-young-people.html
Musical activities for young people
Music plays a key role in the development of individuals and societies: it contributes to the development of intellectual and manual skills, as well as personality, and has a positive influence on the cohesion of the groups that experience music together. In Luxembourg, the organisation of workshops and festivals for children and adolescents is a fun initiation to a formal education in music. Here is our selection of musical activities, both face-to-face and digital, aimed at young audiences!
Family activities to inspire toddlers
Every June, music for all the family returns toneimënsterwithSiren's Call, a celebration of international and local music and culture. There will of course be music with groups from France, Sweden and Canada, among others, and workshops. There will also be a designer market, yoga workshops, foodtrucks and more. A festival for all the family, with free entry for under-12s. When will it be held? The 2024 edition took place on Saturday 29th June. Dates for the 2025 edition have yet to be confirmed.
Rocklabregularly organisesBe A HEAR(o) - Pop Music Week, a series of educational concerts and music workshops for school classes.The 2025 edition takes place from 19th to 23rd May.
Kids' Phil, the Philharmonie's children's programme, is expanding all the time and we invite you to have a look at it too.
TheKulturhaus Niederanvenalso offers musical activities for children throughout the year: make a note in yourdiary. This year'sFête de la musiquetakes place onSaturday 13th June.
Just likeCaku, the cultural programme for children organised at theCentre des Arts Pluriels Ettelbruckand theMierscher Theater. Regularly check the programme of events!
In Clervaux, theFunky Donkey Festivalis a festival for families. The 2025 programme has not yet been unveiled, but there will be shows for the little ones and a food- village.
Don't miss the Hip Hop Marathon, ideal for kids aged 12 and older
For several years, theHip Hop Marathonhas been the unmissable event for young people who want to develop their knowledge of hip-hop culture via the creation of rap songs, graffiti murals, hip-hop choreography and learning beatbox, a technique which consists of making music by imitating instruments with your vocal chords and through singing.
This year, the event will be held in a number of different locationsfrom June onwards:
More to discover on the digital music scene
Although many stakeholders in the Luxembourg cultural sector have embraced digital media for several years, the health crisis has prompted a re-imagining of the range of musical activities for young audiences, which have multiplied since the spring of 2020.
For many years thePhilharmoniehas been committed to developing a range of digital content aimed at children of all ages:
Mir sangen d’Prinzessinnelidd mam Véronique (Video/Audio YouTube)
Be A HEARo - D’Band am Proufsall (Video/Audio YouTube)
The concert series for young audiencesBe A HEAR(o), organised by theRocklab, is also available online. Both educational and entertaining, these videos, aimed at childrenaged between 9 and 12invite them to discover and explore the world of pop/rock music from the backstage of a concert at theRockhaland to get acquainted with the concepts of rhythm, melody and harmony.
Rocklab is expanding its digital service with a series of videos, subtitled in French and English, offering you tips, games and easy-to-use websites on how to have fun making music. Don't miss the videosRocklab for YoungstarsandRocklab New Generation.
Also, theDepartment for the Coordination of Educational and Technological Research and Innovation(SCRIPT, in French), an entity of the Ministry of Education, Children and Youth, has developed several didactic tools to support musical education in schools; they are also available to other interested parties:
Last update20.05.2025
For more information
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Music education in Luxembourg: opportunities at all ages
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/luxembourg-applications-tourisme.html
The best apps to discover Luxembourg
Are you eager to explore the Grand Duchy but don't know where to start? We can recommend ten mobile apps to download to make your stay in Luxembourg more enjoyable.
Find out more about the capital...
Luxembourg City is a beauty to behold but it can be a bewildering maze for those who are unfamiliar with its charms! But there's no need to panic, you'll never get lost with thecityapp (iOS version;Android version)of the City of Luxembourg. This app will provide you with everything you need to know about the capital and it's just a click away. We recommend that visitors just use the 'Welcome', 'Explorer' and 'Mobility' sections. The other functions are essentially for residents only.
The new version of the app is available in three languages (French, German and English). You have the option of customising the screen by adding shortcuts and you can also take advantage of the other features: check the weather, view the event agenda and look up all the bus routes and stops. The app also provides real-time information on bus schedules.
... on your bike!
One of the best ways to explore the city is on a bicycle. Download theVéloh (iOS version;Android version)app and you'll get access to the self-service bicycle rental service. This app will give you access to 1,000 bikes and 97 docking stations across the city. To find an electric bike, all you need to do is to locate a docking station. The app will take care of your request in the blink of an eye. When you locate a bike, just unlock it, jump on the saddle and explore the city in complete freedom.
The app offers flexible packages, from one day to one year. The first thirty minutes of each journey are free.Have a nice trip!
Augmented-reality tours
If you are a fan of new technologies and want to experience the city's historical heritage and tourist attractions, then theVDL-AR(iOS version;Android version)app is made just for you! It allows you to delve into the virtual world of the history of the City of Luxembourg using augmented-reality technology: a tourist trail with seven points of interest is at your fingertips! Just go to one of these hotpots and you'll be drawn into the Grand Duchy of yesteryear.
Do you have a suddenurge to visit a museumbut you don't have a brochure at hand? Enjoy easy access to a wide range of cultural treasures by installing the museum apps on your smartphone.
TheLëtzebuerg City Museum (iOS version;Android version)app is amust-haveon your mobile.This little digital companion, with itswell designed and user-friendly interface, allows you to plan your trip to the museum ahead of time. In the museum, exciting and entertaining audio tours reveal 1,000 years of urban history. Navigational markers help you find your way around intuitively and effortlessly.
A supplementaryDiscover Modeoffers more in-depth content with photos, videos and maps for selected stations and objects. A special Kids Quiz makes the journey of discovery more enjoyable and instructive for younger visitors.
Let's go on an adventure!
Over the years,VisitLuxembourg(iOS version;Android version) has become the main tourism app in the Grand Duchy. Officially launched in July 2021, the app is completely free and offers concrete, personalised, practical and inspiring information and advice. The app has been created by professionals from the tourism industry and is the perfect tool for the ultimate travel experience in Luxembourg, an experience brimming with amazing sights and emotions.
Visit a museum or a castle, enjoy a meal in a restaurant... The app allows you to search and contact the different sites and attractions. You can also make an online reservation while checking transport links and weather information.
If you intend to extend your geographical area of interest and explore other parts of the country, then the best way to travel is by public transport. The perfect companion for this adventure is theCFL mobile app (iOS version;Android version). It's so easy to plan a journey with this app! Moreover, it offers alternative routes and means of transportation, the schedules and information are displayed in real time and tickets are available for purchase directly via the app. All you have to do is step on board!
Pedal or hike
If you would like to combine gastronomy and cycling, theLetsbike  app (iOS version;Android version)is the essential guide. Just download it on your smartphone; it offers quick access to the various routes as well as links to gastronomic attractions. Whether you're planning a bike race or a leisurely family outing, the app provides a wide range of possibilities across the whole country. The only drawback is that when you select a route, you have to pay for it.
Lace up your hiking boots and install the mobile mapping app of the nationalgeoportal (iOS version;Android version)of Luxembourg developed by the Land Registry and Topography Administration. Thanks to this app, you'll never need to buy a portable GPS. When you download it, you’ll be able see topographical maps, view altitude data and, above all, access quality hiking trails. It is also possible to create POIs (points of interest) on the map (thanks to the GPS coordinates - geocaching). Another major benefit of this app is that it allows you to view specific areas offline!
Last update12.03.2026
For more information
Regions
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Discover Luxembourg by bike
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/hidden-places-discovery-luxembourg.html
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
As part of our "Top 5" series, we are going to reveal five fascinating and unique locations in the capital. These hidden jewels are perhaps less well-known than the more popular destinations but they are brimming with history and waiting to be discovered!
The Saint Quirin spring and chapel
Inthe valley of thePétrusse, onrue Saint-Quirin, is hiddenone of the oldest places of worshipin Luxembourg: It was originally a natural cave which later became a Catholic religious edifice; it is now a listed monument.
The chapel is named afterQuirinus of Neuss(Quirinus of Rome),a holy martyr and saint of the Catholic Church.
In this cave,the Celtsworshiped the three norns - the three goddesses of destiny - in order to make contact with the spirits of nature. Later,the Christiansreplaced the Celtic stones and ancient divinities with the three virgins: Fides (faith), Spes (hope) and Caritas (charity), represented on the back of a mule, as well as the three saints Quirinus, Ferreolus and Firminus, who are still on display in the chapel.
Thegothic façadedates back to 1355 is still preserved to this day. Ithouses a small sacristy and a niche with an altar.
The most popular attraction of thispilgrimage site, isthe natural spring water of the cave, which is reputed to be a remedy for skin and eye diseases.
From the 11th century, Saint Quirinus was the patron saint of the fortress and from 1455 onward he became the patron saint of the city of Luxembourg. However, in 1666, he was replaced by the Virgin Mary, the consoler of the afflicted.
D'Schluechthaus
The first public abattoir in Luxembourg City was opened in 1876in thePfaffenthaldistrict; it was situated where the youth hostel is located today.In 1902 another abattoir opened its doors in the district ofHollerich. It was more modern than its predecessor and housed the first refrigeration system in country.
After the First World War, these two small sites were unable to cater forthe increased demand for meat. When the municipality of Hollerich was integrated into the municipality of Luxembourg, the latter builta new abattoir, which incorporated refrigerators as well as a livestock market in this new district. The abattoir opened its doors on 30 December 1929. During the subsequent years, it was gradually modernised in line with the technological advances and logistical requirements. At the height of production, 120 people were employed by the company. In the 1980s, the abattoir produced 4,000 tons of meat per year.
The abattoir closed its doors on 1 August 1997. It is located on a 2.5-hectare site. Currently, it houses askate-park, theLuxembourg Red Crossandstorage facilities.It is also used as apublic gallery for street artists. The city recently launchedan architectural design contest to refurbish and renovatethis urban museum. This site is a prime example of the architectural style of the 1930s and Luxembourg's industrial heritage.
The Spanish turret
On thePierre de Mansfeld alley, behind the "Hondhaus"a steep pathrises upwards. It leads to a special section of theoldObergrünewald fortressand reveals aSpanish turret "hidden from view". The turret is concealed behind a canopy of vegetation and a little further away from its more visible sisters in the city centre.
Historians believe that at the timethere were around 43 of these "Pefferbécksen"(referred to as pepper mills in English owing to their cylindrical shape) The "hidden" Spanish turret is one ofnine turrets in existence. The roofs on all nine turrets have been replaced and some of them have been completely rebuilt. They were used as alookout over the bastion. The turrets project outwards in order to have aclear view of the bottom of the valleyand offer complete protection from the wind and rain. They were used toprotect the fortressfrom spies and to keep a watchful eye on any deserters. The first guardhouses were built during the Spanish regime. Nowadays, the turrets are not only atourist attractionbut also apopular symbol of the city.
ThePéiter Onroucave
At the top of a flight of stepsat the intersection of therue du Glacisandthecôte d'Eichisthe rock ofSaint-Crépin("Krispinusfiels"), anancient and mysterious place of pilgrimage. Crispinus and his brother Crispinianus arethe patron saints of shoemakers, saddlers and tanners,who were numerous in number in Pfaffenthal at the time. It is currently believed that the cave was the last station on the Way of the Cross which existed until the XVII century and which led to this location from the "Siechenhof" (Val des Bons-Malades).
This group of monuments includes asculpture of Christ; at the foot of this statue isa grotto, which housesthe statue ofPéiter Onrou. It clearly symbolises Jesus Christ as the resemblance is striking. The original statue was stolen in the 17th century and replaced in the 19th century. In the middle of the 20th century it was restored and placed in the museum. Nowadays, a copy of the statute lies in its place; the grotto is protected by thick metal bars.
Placed around the statue arecandles containing needles– evidence of anold superstition. Thespell, which has been practiced for countless generations, is supposedto make an unfaithful husband return to his wife. Needles are placed in the candles; the candles represent the bodies of the spouses. The wick is then lit. When the flame reaches the needles, they cause a double dose of pain to the unfaithful man: a sting in the heart when the candle burns down and reaches the needle, and once again when the needle falls.
The maze
Did you know that agreen and artistic mazeis located in theKirchbergpark? This triangular maze by urban architect Peter Latz is situated nearboulevard Kennedy, between theCoqueand the playground of the central park.
TheDendritesculpture by the Canadian artistMichel de Broinrises out from the centre of the maze. This artistic work designed in 2016 is the result of a restricted consultation organised by the Kirchberg Fund. This yellow structure is five metres high. It has four sections branching out in different directions. which are used as viewing platforms. By climbing the steps, you can appreciate views of themaze and its surroundings.Dendritenot only showcases theentrance to the parkbut also serves to attract visitors. The work is inspired by the branches of neurons (dendrites) and, from a distance, it looks like a massive yellow flower that has spread its leaves across the middle of this green surface.
Every two years,a second work of artis placed on display in the maze. This artistic project is the result ofcooperation between the Kirchberg Fund and theCasino Luxembourg – contemporary art forum. Called"1+1", visitors can discover the new work of art for a period of two months. The next addition is earmarked for summer 2021.
Last update09.09.2024
For more information
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
400 years of foreign sovereigns
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/discover-luxembourg-cycling.html
Discover Luxembourg by bike
Luxembourg was considered a cycling country long before the success of the Schleck brothers. And this has become more apparent in recent years with the nationwide expansion of cycle paths and a whole series of other initiatives. The impressive variety in such a small area, the seemingly endless impressions of Luxembourg’s street life and the many people who provide an insight into their region, was admirably captured by Rom Helbach in his book 'Lëtz Bike'.
Incredible diversity
WhenRom Helbach talks about cycling in Luxembourg, he goes into rapture:'You can find everything in Luxembourg', says the freelance photographer and cycling enthusiast. 'There are many possibilities of combining activities in Luxembourg. You can ride a whole afternoon along the flat stretches of theSauer and Mosellerivers, and only 20 minutes further on you will find more difficult areas where you’ll immediately know whether or not you dare face those challenges.'
This diversity is reflected in the regions. More traditionally, theÉislek, as the foothills of the Ardennes are called in Luxembourg, is a hilly area; while theGuttlandand the routes along the Moselle and the Sûre are rather flat. However, Rom Helbach cannot completely confirm this. 'Luxembourg is a passe-partout cycling country– even in theÉislek, you can ride along relatively flat routes.However, there are also stretches here which even professionals admit are very difficult to master.'
Whether you’re a cycling tourist, a family or a passionate biker, everyone gets their money’s worth in Luxembourg.
Who is Rom Helbach?
Rom Helbach, born in 1959, is a passionate cyclist and photographer – two passions he likes to combine. He left his job at a bank in 2016 and has been working as a freelance photographer ever since.
High quality cycling paths
Theroutes are generally of very good quality. Most of the paths can also be used with a racing bike or a travel bike, as most of the field and meadow paths are asphalted. This means you seldom have to take the country roads. Just be careful if you have to though, becausetraffic has increased in the past decades, and this is even noticeable on the back roads.
'If you don’t ride a lot, then you should choose tours that take you along cycle paths or field and meadow paths,' says Rom Helbach. 'However, theLVI[Luxembourg Bicycle Initiative – editor's note] also offers courses, and this is very welcome.'
A whole different world
What is on offer is extraordinary:just a stone’s throw away from the country’s streets, a whole different world opens up.
'On my home stretch around Mondorf, I come to a point where I can see the whole border area of the three countries.' For Rom Helbach it is clear that thebicycle is the perfect means of transport for discovering the country: 'When you travel by bike, you simply see more of the country.'
The book, titled'Lëtz Bike', can be ordered via Letzshopor purchased in any bookshop in Luxembourg. Across the book’s 240 pages, personalities and inhabitants of Luxembourg present their favourite routes and provide insider tips. The 30Bike Tours + Bike Spotsare all available for download as GPX files. At the same time, an app is available for download via a QR code.
A book for all who love cycling
And so the idea behind Rom Helbach’s book 'Lëtz Bike' was born.Luxembourg has a lot to offer, both in terms of cycling and landscapes, andLëtz Bike' should give you a good idea of that.  Occasional cyclists are just as appealing as families or passionate bikers.  However, readers who have little to do with cycling will also get their money’s worth.
In concrete terms, the book presents 30 routes that have been selected together with Luxembourg citizens of various origins.Among them are cycling professionals like Elise Maes and Ralph 'Dizzy' Diseviscourt, as well as hobby cyclists and friends who regularly undertake tours.  The routes have also been carefully selected – there is (almost) no overlapping of the 30 tours, so each one offers something different.
All regions and difficulty levels are included here,from small family tours to XXL tours of over 100 km in length that demand everything.  'The book should appeal to everyone,' says Rom Helbach.  'The project has been a lot of fun for me and all the people involved in it.' Besides that, his other passion on top of cycling is very much part of the book, namely photography.Large-format photos show completely different sides of Luxembourg, which should also give locals new insights into their home country.
Last update18.03.2026
For more information
Adventures on bike: ride through Luxembourg
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Regions
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/geocaching.html
Geocaching: treasure hunting
Geocaching – the most popular treasure hunt in the world has also taken Luxembourg by storm. More than 4,000 caches in the country are waiting to be discovered. But not only that. Luxembourg’s caches take you to some of the most beautiful places in the country, away from the well-known tourist destinations, and allow you to experience the beauty and diversity of the country. Luxembourg’s very lively geocaching scene can help you orientate yourself in Luxembourg. You can make contact via the group’s Facebook page,Geocaching Lëtzebuerg.
Unique impressions
In this day and age of smartphones, gaming consoles and online games,geocaching is almost seen as an alternative to the digital world, with people roaming discovering unknown terrain in search of cleverly camouflaged hiding places (caches), looking for clues, or solving puzzles to find the caches. It’s less about competition with other cachers and more about thepersonal sense of achievement that comes with finding a hiding spot.
Luxembourg’s caches not only attract people with their interesting andbeautifully made finals, but also with their density. You can findaround 4,100 caches for Luxembourgon the popular Geocaching.com platform.
Among them are somereal treasures,asYves Jadin, one of the administrators of theFacebook groupGeocaching Lëtzebuergtells us, including a jukebox final, where you have to assign songs to different artists.
Yves Jadin reveals that there are several regions to visit, andthecapital cityis definitely one of them.A multi-cache leads you through severalstations of theformer fortificationsto places that are normally not listed in tourist guides, and offerwonderful views of the city.
The virtual caches, where you don’t sign a paper log, but where you have to answer questions or take photos, for example, are also very popular and lead one to extraordinary places. Thepanorama elevator from Pfaffenthal to the upper town is especially worth a visit.
TheLuxembourg City Touristicache(GC1JENX) guides you through the history and present day life of the city of Luxembourg.Unique impressions and viewsawait you here – and this is just one of many caches that allow you to discover the capital.
In theMinettarea in thesouth of the country, geocaches are quite common and offersurprising discoveries. Whether you are an Urban Cacher or like to be in nature, everybody finds caches to their taste in this region.
Outside the city, tothe north of the country, theÉislekregion is very popular, especially thearea around the Obersauer lake. The cities of Ettelbrück and Echternach alsooffer impressive geocaching options, as well as beautiful landscapes and buildings – a perfect opportunity to combine activities with sightseeing.
"You move around, you don’t need guides, and you get to places that the locals know, but where tourists don’t usually go," says Yves Jadin.
A lively scene
However, before visiting Luxembourg it is also worth having a look at theGeocaching LëtzebuergFacebook group.Since 2011, the group has been helping members when things go wrong. You can also find warnings about ticks or oak processionary caterpillars here. According to Yves Jadin, thegood networking of the Luxembourg geocachersis very visible in this group. People know each other, help each other and meet regularly at events. The most important thing is to spend time together. Many families take part in these events and friendships develop.
"We have a lively scene," says Yves Jadin, referring to the 1,800 members of the group. "Events are important because if people are interested in geocaching, they get help there – it’s quicker than going via a website or Facebook."
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Top 5: walking trails around castles
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/hiking-ii-eislek-ardennes-guttland-minett-red-rocks.html
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Do you want to discover Luxembourg and stay fit? Do you need to disconnect from your day-to-day life and reconnect with nature and your spirit? Featuring one of the largest pedestrian networks in Europe with over 5,000km of paths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet to say the least. The range of hiking paths in Luxembourg is so extensive that picking one can be a daunting task! Here is a small selection that will allow you to diversify your walks and experience nature peacefully. We invite you on a pedestrian journey to discover the valleys, forests, meadows, lakes, rocks and natural parks of Luxembourg. Follow us in this second article on hiking trails in theÉislek,GuttlandandMinettregions.
Éislek: from the rocky ridges to Luxembourg's largest lake
The tourist region of the Ardennes awaits you in the North of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. It is calledÉislekby Luxembourgers andOeslingby Germans. Featuring two nature reserves and Luxembourg's largest lake, the region is a real nature temple for hikers.
One of the highlights of the region in terms of hiking trails is without a doubt theEscapardenne Lee Trail. Featuring over 2,000m of cumulated altitude difference and covering52kmthrough the wooded valley of the Sûre, this is a route forexperienced hikers. Nonetheless, this trail linking Ettelbruck and Kautenbach can be split intothree daysof walk, which means that nature and landscape lovers can enjoy a more suitable experience. The first leg from Ettelbruck toBourscheid-Moulincovers17.8km, the second one to Hoscheid19.3kmand the third one to Kautenbach14.5km. Don't miss any of the 32 panoramic viewpoints along the way, on a path that is over 60% in its natural state. A long walk to unwind!
Then, go down the rocky ridges towards the Lake of the Upper Sûre to enjoy thelake hiking trail, divided into two sections:eastandwest. Away from the traffic, flora and fauna are extraordinarily abundant. Covering a total distance of44km, this is ademanding hike. A tip for hikers who are not so experienced: take your time and complete the trail over a few days through the small quaint villages along the trail.
Guttland: meditation, legends and caves
TheGuttlandtourist region lies in the centre and west of Luxembourg and can be easily reached from the City of Luxembourg. The Guttland is an invitation to slow tourism and a real paradise for fans of low-impact mobility.
A great example of this model of slow tourism is themeditation trailinRindschleiden, Luxembourg's smallest village. Over1.5km, a total of 12 stations are an invitation to tranquillity and contemplation. It is thanks to the initiative of the inhabitants of the commune of Wahl, as well as other spiritually-minded people, that this first thematic meditation path in the Grand Duchy came into being in 2010. TheRandschleider Padas those who have done it before call it affectionately, offers visitors a place for relaxation and leisure.
As for theReimberg hiking trail, known asSiwen-Brécken-Weeby locals, it leads toSchankegriecht, a small valley crossed by a brook. Over a distance of5km, you will cross a large number of small wooden bridges over the brook and a unique rocky landscape. TheSchankegriechtgets its name from theSchankemännchen, a ghost hunter who once haunted the area, spreading fear and panic on his night outings.
If you fancy a longer hike, take theSchoenfels hiking trail. Thanks to this9-kmtrail, you will be able to discover theMamerleeën, a unique set of sandstone caves. These range from natural sandstone caves to an extensive network of artificial galleries located just below the ground. The starting point is set near the magnificent dungeon ofSchoenfels Castle.
Nature topoguide: 40 years - 40 areas - 40 trails (Video/Audio YouTube)
40 years - 40 areas - 40 trails
TheFondationHëllef fir d'Natur de natur&ëmweltcelebrates its 40th anniversary with the topoguide "40 years - 40 areas - 40 trails". The guidebook highlights 40 walking trails that lead us to discover the richness and diversity of Luxembourg's flora, fauna and natural environments.
Much more than a simple hiking guide, this book is a complete nature guideaccessible to all. Indeed, for each trail, a QR code refers to a downloadable GPX file for more comfortable navigation with a smartphone. To accompany the guide, 40 videos are also posted onFacebook,InstagramandYouTube.
The guidebook isavailable in French, English and German. It can be purchased at Ernster bookshops, Cactus supermarkets and theMaison de la Nature in Kockelscheuer.
Minett: nature, iron and history
The Land of the Red Rocks - called theMinettby Luxembourgers - lies in the South of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. Also known as the Red Rock region, it owes its name to the bright red colour of the ore that was at the heart of the success of the iron and steel industry in Luxembourg during the industrial era.
The not-to-be-missed hike of the region is without a doubt theNatura 2000 Ellergrontrail. There is a wide variety of landscapes, such as ponds and gorges, but also vestiges of iron ore mining. This is how nature blends with history on this trail, which can be completed fromEsch-sur-Alzetteinthree loops. The short loop covers2.5kmand is all about nature and its connection with the old open-cast mines: ideal for young walkers and families. A second trail of4.5kmillustrates the exploitation of iron fields. Covering5km, the third loop goes through the forest and calls into question the relationship between woods and human beings.
We now offer you to go toDudelange, the Grand Duchy's fourth largest city, which used to be known as the Forge of the South in light of its industrial activities. Covering just over7km, theDudelange-Haard circular walkoffers breathtaking views, green forests, the vestiges of the former mining operations as well as a stroll through the city'sItalian District. Through this circular walk, you will be able to combine nature and history, discovering the major role of immigration, particularly Italian immigration, in the economic development of Luxembourg in the 19th century.
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/hiking-i-mullerthal-moselle.html
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Do you want to discover Luxembourg and stay fit? Do you need to disconnect from your day-to-day life and reconnect with nature and your spirit? Featuring one of the largest pedestrian networks in Europe with over 5,000km of paths, the Grand Duchy is a safe bet to say the least. The range of hiking paths in Luxembourg is so extensive that picking one can be a daunting task! Here is a small selection that will allow you to diversify your walks and experience nature peacefully.We invite you on a pedestrian journey to discover the valleys, forests, meadows, lakes, rocks and natural parks of Luxembourg. Follow us in this first article on hiking trails in theMullerthalandMoselleregions.
Mullerthal: walking amidst rocks and waterfalls
The Mullerthal region, known asMëllerdallin Luxembourgish, lies in the East of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. It is often referred to as Luxembourg's Little Switzerland. The region forms an exceptional biotope marked by stunning rock formations.
This region is dotted with local paths and hiking trails that will grab your fancy, whether you are an experienced hiker or you are looking for a walk to unwind.
Take thelocal Hoelt R7 trailto discover, over3.5km, a mythical forest with tall beeches, cliffs, vines... and a legend! You might even come across the heroin of this story in the face of theKimmheischenrock, the largest one of that forest.
If you fancy a stroll by the water, why not try the newW7 local trailthat starts with a steep ascent? It will lead you to the Black Ernz (Ernz Noire) river, theKalktuffquelltravertine source and finally theSchéissendëmpelwaterfalls. Overall, the trail consists of10.5 kmwhere you can feel the coolness of crystal-clear waters.Important: There is currently a diversion in this area due to work on the wooden footbridge. To find out more about the condition of the route, contact the region'stourist information centresbefore setting off!
With over 240 metres of drops over7.5km, theScheidgen trailis an alternative for hikers looking for a more active day. Here, you will go across thePonteschgronnvalley in a loop, discover the typical rock formations of the region and join the cycling path along theDeisterbaach.
Moselle: dreaming amidst vineyards and nature reserves
The Moselle - d'Muselin Luxembourgish - extends along the eastern side of Luxembourg. The region's name comes from the river that draws the 42km of natural border between the Grand Duchy and Germany. Given its relatively mild climate, you can enjoy the Moselle's sunshine only 20km away from Luxembourg City!
Hiking lovers can also find fulfilment in the Luxembourg Moselle. In fact, the region features threePremium trails: thedream loops, dreamlike routes of excellence that meet the high standards of theGerman Hiking Institute.
Covering8.4km, thePalmbergpath starts in the wine-growing town of Ahn. Along limestone rocks, the route takes you through thePalmberg'svineyards with its breathtaking views of the Moselle valley. Lush forests and orchids await you!
As for theManternacher Fielstrail, it is filled with adventures. It covers9.6km, for the most part within the Manternacher Fiels nature reserve. Starting fromAm Burfeld, the winding path goes up into the nature reserve, passes through a beautiful ravine forest and follows the course of the river Syre. A surprise awaits you halfway through: a vineyard in the midst of the forest! Amedium hardtrail that got a score of 91 points when it was certified by the German Hiking Institute.
The third dream loop is theSchengen – without borderstrail. This8.5kmtrail starts in the village of Schengen, then cross theStrombiergnature reserve before arriving in France near a small village called Contz-les-Bains. Given its location, using this route means that you can discover France, Germany and Luxembourg in one hike.
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/shopping.html
Shopping in Luxembourg - You'll be spoilt for choice
With more than 1,000 stores, Luxembourg City and the surrounding area constitute the largest shopping area in the Grand Duchy and further afield. Heaven for fashionistas and serial shoppers! Discover long, shopper-friendly pedestrian areas, up-to-date supermarkets, shopping malls, and trendy boutiques. In the Grand Duchy, you can enjoy shopping and strolling along in calm, relaxed surroundings.
Not just in the city centre
From theVille-Hauteto theGare, through the busypedestrian areasnear the Grand Duke's palace, Luxembourg City offers happy shopping all day long in the busy shopping streets in the various parts of the city. The cosmopolitan pedestrian areas include picturesque streets in the old part of the city and charming shady café terraces - an invitation for shoppers to stroll from one shop to the next.
Most of the main international names are here, as well as manyhigh-street names, alongsideelegant luxury boutiquesin the city centre, particularly in the well-knownRue Philippe IIand other streets nearby. Luxury clothing, ready-to-wear,objets d'art,decorative itemsandlocal produce- everything is here, for all tastes and every purse.
The area around the railway station (gare) has a charm of its own. Independent stores jostle with the big names in the area around theAvenue de la Libertéand theAvenue de la Gare.
The range of shops in other towns in the Grand Duchy - Esch-sur-Alzette, Dudelange, Diekirch, Ettelbruck - is also very trendy, and varied.
Malls and shopping centres
Keen shoppers constantly on the look-out for new shop windows to trawl will love the shopping mallsin and around the capital city. These superstores offer products for every purse, from the affordable to the top of the range, attracting both fashion victims and window-shoppers. Fashion, jewellery, beauty products, electronics and decoration - the choice is endless, and the shopping experience is unique.
There are many supermarkets and shopping centres on the outskirts of a number of places in the Grand Duchy. The biggest of these malls are in Bertrange, Esch-Belval, Mersch, Pommerloch, Huldange, Walferdange, Junglinster, and Echternach.
A tour of the Grand Duchy'smain shopping centresincludes:
Also not to be missed are thethree new commercial areasthat have opened in thecapitalin 2019:
Last update28.01.2026
For more information
A tour of Luxembourg through its markets
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/markets.html
A tour of Luxembourg through its markets
Luxembourg towns and villages invite you to visit their markets. In the morning or throughout the day, squares abound with stalls with local produce, second-hand items and antiques. Come and see the wide range of fresh produce or find treasures amidst the items sold at the markets of Luxembourg.
Fresh food markets
Seasonal fruit, fresh vegetables, local meat - Luxembourg's fresh food markets are mouth-watering. Luxembourg's fresh markets offer an extensive range of produce locally sourced in the country and from further afield. These products are very popular in Luxembourg because of their quality, and you are welcome to visit one of the weekly markets to find it out for yourself.
One of the most popular fresh produce markets is theStater Maart, which returns to the Place Guillaume II from Saturday 15th July 2023. With some 40 stalls, it welcomes the public onWednesdays and Saturdays from 7.30 a.m. to 2 p.m. It offers a vast choice of products: regional and seasonal products, organic products, fruit and vegetables, bakery and pastry products, meat, roast chicken, pasta, cheese, flowers and plants, and much more.
Also in Luxembourg City, theGarer Maartis a small market offering regional and seasonal products in the heart of the Gare district. Since It takes place everyThursday from 7.30 a.m. to 2 p.m. on the Place de Paris. A real neighbourhood market, it has a wider range of stalls: oils and jams, apple juice, honeys, wines, breads and pastries, as well as flowers and textiles.
Many other towns have their very own not-to-be-missed fresh food market once or twice a week:
Aside from weekly markets, some markets take place on a monthly or bi-monthly basis in Mamer, Strassen, Hesperange, Mondorf, Schifflange, etc. Many places have their own market. Ask your municipal administration if you want to find out more about markets in your region.
You will find information onaffiliated markets' opening hourson the website of theLëtzebuerger Maarteverband(Luxembourg Federation of Markets).
Looking for more information? Here are the Luxembourgish federations which organise markets and flea markets.
Flea markets and antiques
Flea markets and antique stallsare always worth a visit. You will often find small dealers with delightful items and sometimes even little treasures.
TheAntiques & Art Fair Luxembourg, which takes place every year at Luxexpo, is the largest event for antiques and second-hand items in Luxembourg, set on a surface of over 4,500m2.
Several other places - including the town of Echternach and Luxembourg City -organise their own flea markets and/or antique sales.
TheGlacismaart- Luxembourg's biggest market
TheGlacismaartis the biggest market in Luxembourg. The market brings together hundreds of fresh food, second-hand and textile dealers on theGlaciscar park in Luxembourg-Limpertsberg. It is on every3rd Sunday of the month from March to November(apart from August during theSchueberfouer).
Glacismaart - Impressions (Video/Audio YouTube)
Glacismaart - Impressions
Since 2006, theGlacismaarthas been the place to go for those taking a Sunday stroll. You will also find food and drink stands, and entertainment for the kids such as a carousel and an inflatable castle.
Garage sales and flea markets
Luxembourg is an Aladdin's Cave for treasure hunters. Local initiatives organise many garage sales and flea markets across the country, including the famousflea market of Luxembourg City. It takes place on the1st Sunday of the month, from April to October, on the Glacis field.
Would you like to take part in this gigantic open-air barter, which allows you to display and sell items you no longer need? Then submit yourrequestto the City of Luxembourg.
Last update31.03.2026
For more information
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Culinary delights
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/going-out.html
Going out in the evening
Nightlife in Luxembourg City and elsewhere in the country has developed significantly in recent years. These days, there is something for everyone, all year round.
Treat your taste buds withLuxembourg gastronomy!Restaurantsoffering excellent cuisine for food lovers on any budget can be found throughout the country and in the most beautiful of settings.
Whether it is for after the restaurant, after-work or the aperitif,cafés, bars, terraces and clubs await you. Trendy bars, luxurious lounges, authentic local cafés, green terraces, rock venues and nightclubs with notorious DJs: what are you keen on?
Nightlife for party people
Luxembourg's nightlife is rife, especially inLuxembourg City. But don't be discouraged if you are outside the city, you can find bars and clubs where you can enjoy a drink, chat with friends or listen to musicall over the country.
Luxembourg City: celebrating at the foot of the fortifications or under the grand ducal palace's lights
In the Grund and Clausen districts, the cobblestoned streets of the capital are home to many cafés, restaurants and bars, especially Irish and English pubs.
In the Grund, you could drop by theNeumünster Abbey Cultural Exchange Centre(neimënster) for one of its many events: plays, concerts, exhibitions, festivals... This institution benefits from a spectacular setting of theBockfielsand is located on an itinerary listed as aUNESCO world heritage site.
TheRives de Clausen, former site of the Mousel-brewery converted partially to a recreational spot, is a magnet for partygoers who like to revel in the modern and hip bars located at the foot of the city's ancient fortifications. You'll find theMelusinaa stone's throw away,a club that has played a major role in Luxembourg's nightlife for over 30 years. The events it hosts are popular with international clubbers and they are rich in cocktails, great DJs and people from all over the world.
The Old Town areais a meeting place for young people and well-connected people. This quarter is a must if you like to go out in Luxembourg City! Located between the grand ducal palace, Clausen hill and theCorniche, it offers all you could wish for: restaurants, cafés, bars, concerts and a stunning historical setting. And you can enjoy all of ituntil 3 a.m.!
Going out elsewhere – good ideas outside the capital
Belvalin Esch-sur-Alzette is not only home to theRockhal, Luxembourg's temple of contemporary electronic music, but also to the University of Luxembourg. The area around it has become the leisure area and the place to go out for a large number of students and residents. This cultural melting pot offerscinema, restaurants, cafés, concerts, exhibitions and other activitiesall year round.
The municipality ofMerschlies almost at the very centre of the country. Mersch has become a nightlife centre too with the opening of new restaurants and bars in recent years. TheMierscher Kulturhausoffers all sorts of performances and evening events.
In summer especially, the terraces of the main square and the old town ofDiekirchinvite you to take a seat and enjoy a pleasant moment with a drink while soaking up the sun or with dinner under a star-lit sky. The popular festival known as 'Al Dikkrich' is famous all over the country and does not only attract local residents! Over a period offive days around the 2nd weekend of July, young and old alike celebrate in the Donkey City.
In towns and villages along the Sûre and theLuxembourgish Moselle, many restaurants and cafés are open and give you the opportunity to relax and enjoy this beautiful region. But the people of the Moselle region like to party as well: for example, a wide range ofwine festivalstake place in Grevenmacher, Wormeldange and Wellenstein from spring to autumn.Grab this opportunity to delight in local produce and mingle with the Moselle locals!
Last update13.10.2023
For more information
Festival and traditions
Culinary delights
Relaxing
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/activities-children.html
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Looking for ideas for a family outing? Want to pass on your passion for nature, culture, or science to your children? With its adventure parks, castles, museums, festivals and events, Luxembourg is a safe bet. Here's our selection of activities in the four corners of the country.
Adventure, here I come!
Would you like to experience an exciting adventure with your family? So put your courage to the test in one of our manyadventure parks.Echternach, the oldest town of Luxembourg, is home to theyouth hostel, which boasts a 14-metre high climbing wall. If you'd rather expend your energy in the South of Luxembourg, theParc Le'h Adventuresis a great option. It offers monkey bridges, zip lines, Tarzan jumps and even a Bambini trail for the littlest ones. Or why not go toSteinfort Adventure, near the Belgian border? It's a treetop adventure park with 10 trails offering various levels of difficulty.
For families who prefer more quiet discovery-filled activities, theParc Merveilleuxin Bettembourgwill be your cup of tea. You can watch from up close some animals originating from five continents - an unmissable experience! Before or after a nice meal at one of the park's two restaurants, children can expend their energy and enjoy the many attractions, such as a playground and mini-golf.
Relax and let your children have fun!
Playgrounds are a great opportunity to unwind, and the most famous ones can be found in the capital. Your children can revel in parks such as Merl Park, the Kockelscheuer playground or the Municipal Park's well-known pirate ship. Discover the capital's playgrounds on thewebsite of Luxembourg City.
Outside the City of Luxembourg, theMersch municipal parkis also a perfect place to relax with its colourful children's playgrounds. Moreover, thanks to the ecological use of the park, fauna and flora can be seen around the lake and from the terrace of the pavilion!
Want to take your kids to playgrounds beyond your neighbourhood?
With theSpillplaz.luApp you can search by postcode or city, but also by sorting other criteria: areas for children under 3 years old, covered playgrounds or nearby restaurants, for example. All this in four languages: French, English, German and Luxembourgish.
Information is also available on the websitewww.spillplaz.lu.
Discover history and culture as a family
As part of a family outing, find out about the Grand Duchy's different traditions, customs and tourist attractions. Lovers of knights and princesses will delight in the country's manycastles:Koerich CastleorVianden Castleall host during the summer fabulous medieval festivals that will immerse you into a whole new world. In Luxembourg City, why not take a tour of the fortress, theBock Casematesor thePetrusse Casemates? Don't forget that theGrand Ducal Palaceis open to the public from July to September!
If you are an art lover, you'll fall for Luxembourg's museums, which are the perfection alternative for not so sunny days. Please note that most of them offer special activities for children:MUDAMoffers guided tours for children, theCasino-Forum for Contemporary Artorganises guided tours and workshops for children and young people and theNationalmusée um Fëschmaartwelcomes children to creative workshops. Please note that theTramsmusée(Tram Museum) and theVitariumoffer tours that are specifically adapted to family visits.
In April 2024, a museum dedicated entirely to children opened its doors in Wiltz:PlommKannermusée. Reserved for 1-12-year-olds and their families, the museum is designed around participation, whether in the permanent exhibition, the Tree of Tales, or in the creative workshops.
A day exploring nature
A wide range of nature activities can be enjoyed in Luxembourg, which will no doubt spark your children's curiosity. TheNational Natural History Museumtakes you on a path of discovery of our planet and offers activities for children via itsScience ClubandPanda Club. TheWasserbillig Aquariumand theButterfly Garden, as well as theTouristic Domain of the Ardennes Draught Horse Robbesscheierwhere you can discover workhorses of the Ardennes, are fascinating for the young and old alike.
In order to raise your children's awareness, training courses and workshops organised by the Centre for Nature Protection that goes by the nameD'Haus vun der Naturare experiences not to be missed. If you would rather discover Luxembourgish landscapes in peace and quiet, a great family activity is to visit one of the various lakes of the country.Remerschen Lake,Upper Sûre LakeandEchternach Lakeare the most popular ones. What's more, trips to these lakes can easily be combined with other activities, such as adventure parks!
Last update20.02.2026
For more information
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Musical activities for young people
Geocaching: treasure hunting
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/sightseeing-tours.html
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
The many tourist routes across Luxembourg are a great way to relive the country's history, admire its architecture and find out about its industrial past. The fascinating synergy between old and new and the symbiosis of Luxembourg's urban centres with the natural world create a unique and enchanting blend.
Explore a thousand years of history
VisitingLuxembourg Cityis like travelling back in time. Luxembourg may be a small country, with a surface area of 2,586km2 and more than 680,000 inhabitants, but it has a rich and complex past, and its capital city sums upEuropean history in a nutshell.
There's no better way to exploreLuxembourg's eventful, thousand-year-long historythan by walking one of the many sightseeing routes in Luxembourg City:
This route takes you on a tour of what is essentially Luxembourg's biggestopen-air museum. The starting point for the5.5kmwalk is the ruins of the former castle of the Counts of Luxembourg and the adjoining archaeological crypt – the birthplace of the city and the country. Inthree hours, you will explore the medieval ramparts and the remains of the fortress. Don't miss: theBock Casemates.
This4.6kmhistorical walk takes you in and around the district ofClausen, with its many architectural gems dating back to the time of Count Mansfeld, who became a prince in 1517 and was made Governor of the Duchy of Luxembourg (1540) and then of the Netherlands (1590). Follow the 'M' arrows to explore winding lanes, hidden staircases and 19th-century walls. This is a greatthree-hourtour with some amazing views!
Are you a fan ofmilitary history? If you are fascinated by the city's lastfortifications– how they were built and which parts were most strategically important –, then the Vauban Circular Walk is for you. The walk is named after engineer Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban, who was responsible for the reconstruction work after the fortified city was captured by the French. The work carried out by Vauban earned the city its reputation as an impregnable fortress – it was known as theGibraltar of the North.
Or maybe you just want to go for a walk that will give you awonderful panoramic viewover Luxembourg City? In that case, head for theChemin de la Corniche, described as Europe's most beautiful balcony by Luxembourg writer Batty Weber. The walk takes you along the ramparts built in the 17th century by the Spanish and the French, running parallel with the Alzette valley.
UNESCO Tour for All
Did you know that the old quarters and fortifications in Luxembourg City are on theUNESCO World Heritage List? In addition to the many existingwalks and tours, two new audio guides and a brochure forpeople with specific needshave recently been produced to make this historical site even more accessible:
Nature in the city
Luxembourg Cityis dotted withgreen spacesthat can also be explored on foot.
Thewalking tour around the Bonnevoie districtleads you to theSchläifmillenartists' workshops, which began more than 30 years ago when a group of artists looking for a workspace set up in a disused industrial warehouse. As you walk along thewoodland pathbeside theriver Alzette, you will also spot the former gunpowder mill andPolfermillenspinning mill. This is a great walk to find out more about the role of textile manufacturing in the Luxembourg economy in the 19th century and to discover how cottage industries gradually developed into factories along the river's edge to make use of the energy potential of water.
Do you love roses? If so you'll want to check out theRosaLi Circular Walk. As you stroll through the district ofLimpertsberg, you will find out about its rich rose-growing heritage, which led to Luxembourg becoming known asRose Countryat the turn of the 20th century.
Admire the country's architectural and artistic gems
If you are acontemporary architectureenthusiast, you will particularly appreciate the 14 tours in thearchitectour.luarchitecture guide. In total, you'll get to see some 278 works of architecture throughout the country.
In Luxembourg City, theKirchberg Plateau, the European quarter and business hub for Luxembourg's financial centre, is an open-air gallery for contemporary architecture. Thestation districtand theUpper Townare also home to fine examples of Luxembourg City'sarchitectural heritage.
You will be beaming with enthusiasm as you check out the contrasting architectural styles of the city's seven museums. theMuseum(s)milewalk is a tour in the form of a smile! We can guarantee that you will be blown away by the diversity and unique nature of each one.
The history ofsouthern Luxembourgis imprinted on the facades of the many protected buildings that make up thearchitectural heritage ofEsch-sur-Alzette. Slip on a comfortable pair of shoes and set out to explore the open-air scenery that tells the history of the 'Forge of the South', a surprising melting-pot of European architecture. Also available as avirtual walk!
Historical and architectural guide to Esch-sur-Alzette – Rue de l'Alzette (Part 1) (Video/Audio)
Piece together the region's steelmaking past
As you're now in thesouth of Luxembourg, why not take the opportunity to find out more about the region'ssteelmaking past?
TheTerres rouges(Minettin Luxembourgish) owe their name to the iron ore that was the key to Luxembourg's successful steel industry from the late 19th century onwards. In recent years, the region has transformed the relics of past industrial success into tourist facilities for the present and the future, with a host of surprising activities on offer.
You can now explorethe terrace of the blast furnaces: Explore the Belval site and marvel at the modern architecture of the new buildings contrasting with the industrial heritage. The guide will explain the conception of the quarter and the conservation of the blast furnaces in the context of creating a new urban quarter. The visit culminates at the top of Blast Furnace A, which has been open to visitors since 2014. Climb the staircase alongside the former pressure reactor and read the information about the workings of the industrial plant.​ A breathtaking view awaits you from the top floor!
Last update09.03.2026
For more information
Architectural walk around Luxembourg City
The touristic South
Luxembourg, a land of castles
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities/trails.html
Discovering Luxembourg on a hike
Are you looking for a day or weekend to disconnect in nature while staying active? You will find an incredible amount ofwalking paths, cycling paths and mountain bike routesall over the country. On only 2,586 km2, you will discover amazing rock formations, rivers meandering through forests, small villages full of charm and character! There are many ways you can discover Luxembourg by yourself, as a family or with a group of friends: a relaxing walk combined with a cultural tour, a bicycle ride to cover a wider area, or a real challenge drenched in adrenaline with your mountain bike. Join us to disconnect actively!
Luxembourg on foot
Hiking is certainly the best way to discover not only Luxembourg's nature reserves with their very different landscapes, but also villages that you can go through using one of the many routes available. In fact, Luxembourg features one of the largest pedestrian networks in Europe, with over5,000km of paths!
Circular walksare signposted with a blue triangle on a white background and offer itineraries of between 4 and 16km, formingcircles. They are especially appropriate forfamily walks. Some go through the woods, such as the circular walks ofBeaufortorBorn, while others invite you to discover towns as well, such as that ofEchternach, and villages such asBourglinster.
TheMullerthal Trailis a great option if you fancy discovering the natural beauties of theMullerthal region. The nature trails passing through meadows and forests, often just alongside typical rock formations, are truly impressive!
You will be able to hike across borders with theNaturWanderPark de lux, which will also be an opportunity to discover the LuxembourgArdenneson foot.
Move, we carry
You've always wanted to go on a bike trip but never had the will or strength to take your luggage with you? No more excuses with the latest initiative:Move, we carry.
It is a service for individuals and travel professionals, allowingluggage transport for all hikers or cyclists who wish to discover Luxembourg in stages. ​ Removed after 10 a.m. in the morning and delivered before 4 p.m. at the latest the same day, from and to any paying accommodation located in the Grand Duchy, the luggage thus follows tourists at a distance when they go hiking or cycling. ​
Make your reservations online and don't miss the information on the initiative's website.
Luxembourg by bike
Luxembourg is a cycling nation and bicycle touring is booming. Thenational network of cycling pathscurrently covers600km, but it is planned to reach 950km. If you are a fan of cycling, you can discover the country by using the23 pathsthat run across the Grand Duchy.
You fancy adaytripbut the route you decided on is far from your home or hotel? So take advantage of Luxembourg's rail network to use the routes availablefrom station to stationand return to your starting point by train if you are tired!
If you would like alonger getawayto really disconnect, it is worth noting that the network of establishments with theBed+Bikelabel is there for you and your bike all over the country. Such accommodation offers secure bike storage facilities, tools for small repairs and specific bicycle touring tourist information. You can also be sure you'll get a balanced breakfast!
And don't forget that if you don't have a bicycle, for yourself, your family or your visiting friends, you canrentbikes all over the country!
Luxembourg by mountain bike
Luxembourg offers700kmof mountain bike trails that can help you discover the country's most hidden natural treasures while staying sporty. The diverse landscapes of the country, with a relatively rugged topography and profuse vegetation, is perfect for mountain-biking.
The trails' varying degrees of difficulty meet all expectations. Are you looking for a medium-level trail amidst the vineyards with breathtaking views on theMoselle river? So take theVelo Pomariumtrail. Are you in for a strong dose of adrenaline? TheRedRock MTB Trailawaits you in the South of the country, in the Land of theRed Rocks.
Mountain-bikingguided toursare another option to discover new trails with other mountain-biking lovers, such as inLarochetteorBettendorf-Reisdorf. The perfect opportunity to make new friends while going across the country actively!
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Discover Luxembourg by bike
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/cathedral-notre-dame-luxembourg.html
Cathedral Notre-Dame
Notre Dame Cathedral is one of the most visited monuments in Luxembourg. Located in the heart of the capital, this magnificent edifice was built in 1613. Visitors can admire the nave, the stained-glass windows and above all the statue of the Virgin Mary.
Around a bend in the road, a stone's throw from the city centre, Notre Dame Cathedral rises into the capital's skyline. With its three towers, two of which are 40 metres high, this architectural jewel is rightly one of the most visited monuments. Every year, thousands of visitors pass through the gates of this edifice.
The cathedral was originally a Jesuit church, the plans for which were drawn up by the Jesuit Brother Jean du Blocq (1583-1656).The foundation stone was laid in 1613. Construction of the church building was spread over several years, and was finally completed in 1621, as indicated by the date on the entrance portal.
Following the suppression of the Jesuit order in 1773, the missionaries left the city and handed over the running of the church to the state-run college. In 1778, Empress Maria Theresa of Austria donated the church to the City of Luxembourg, and since 1844 it has been known as Notre Dame Church. After the creation of the Diocese of Luxembourgin 1870, it was elevated to the rank of cathedralby Pope Pius IX.
Over the centuries, the cathedral has expanded to accommodate its ever-growing congregation.Between 1935 and 1937, Notre-Dame cathedral was extendedon its south side with the addition of a transept, a new choir and a crypt, which can also be visited.
Pope John Paul II visits Luxembourg
40 years ago, Pope John Paul II visited Luxembourg. It was his 26th foreign trip to a total of 129 countries during his term of office. During his two days in the Grand Duchy,on 15 and 16 May 1985, the head of the Catholic Church visited the Grand Ducal capital, Esch-sur-Alzette, and the abbey town of Echternach. During his visit, the Pope met the Grand Ducal family andcelebrated mass on the Glacis field in front of 60,000 people. The Bishop of Rome also visited the European Parliament in Kirchberg and the Arbed factory in Esch-Belval.
The cathedral and its two entrances
Notre-Dame cathedral is predominantly Gothic in style, but also features several Baroque and Renaissance elements, such as the bronze portals by the Luxembourg artist Auguste Trémont, which are located at the western entrance to the building. There is also a large forecourt with a small wall, trees and steps leading up to the cathedral.
The main entrance, on the Rue Notre-Dame side, opens onto a portal created in 1613 by the sculptor Daniel Müller. Above the portal are statues of the Virgin Mary and Saints Peter and Paul.
Several architectural styles inside
The cathedral's interior is not only resplendent, but also a fine example of the blending of different architectural styles. Late Gothic and Renaissance styles stand side by side.
The nave, divided into four bays, is flanked by two side aisles. It is followed by a wide transept, onto which the cathedral's choir opens. Ten impressive columns with Italian neo-Romanesque motifs rise high to support the rib vaults.
All the stained-glass windows dating from the 19th and 20th centuries, created by the Frenchman Louis Barillet and the Luxembourger Emile Probst, among others, illuminate the building in the most brilliant and varied colours. They celebrate the Virgin Mary and represent saints particularly venerated in Luxembourg.
The artistic decoration includes paintings, murals, and sculptures by a number of well-known artists. Various coats of arms on the right-side aisle precede the choir with its altar decorated with precious alabaster statues.
Virgin Mary and crypt
The jewel of the building is at the back of the choir,the wooden statue of the Virgin Mary, comforter of the afflicted, patron saint of Luxembourg City (since 1666) and of the Grand Duchy (since 1678). Its veneration dates back to 1624. Duringthe annual Octave pilgrimage(April-May), the most important religious festival in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the 70-centimetre-high statue of the Virgin Mary is carried in procession through the streets of the city.
In the crypt, a forest of twelve columns supports the upper church. At the entrance is the funerary monument to John the Blind, King of Bohemia and Count of Luxembourg, who died at the Battle of Crécy in 1346. But the crypt, decorated with stained glass windows by Anton Wendling (1891-1965), is alsothe resting place of deceased members of the Grand Ducal family and the Luxembourg clergy. The two lions guarding the entrance to the vault are also the work of Auguste Trémont.
Last update28.01.2025
For more information
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/friches-industrie-creative-tiers-lieux-luxembourg.html
Places of encounter and creative industrial wastelands in Luxembourg (I)
An industrial wasteland is a piece of land previously used for industrial purposes that has since been abandoned. The rehabilitation of these sites will enhance the heritage for both the region and the population. Today, industrial wastelands are often transformed by local authorities into places dedicated to creative projects and to promoting community life. In this way, culture is embedded in the region and they become important places of social and cultural cohesion. In this article, we present some examples from Luxembourg.
Schläifmillenin Luxembourg City
Nestled in the verdant Alzette valley between the districts of Bonnevoie and Hamm in Luxembourg City liesthe site of a former textile factory, theSchläifmillen. It was once a flagship of Luxembourg's textile industry, thanks to the enterprising Godchaux brothers.The factory, founded in 1830, employed 800 people at its peak, and the industrial site was virtually a town in its own right, with housing, a school, a wash house and a grocery store.It closed after World War I when the German market was lost. The site was subsequently run by the Société d'études et de constructions d'appareils de levage et de traction,and since 1958 it has belonged to Luxembourg City Council.
Although some of the buildings were destroyed,what was left was redeveloped during the 1980s.The site now has housing, a training centre andan artists' centre and gallery. The artists' centre houses workshops for painters, sculptors, photographers and multimedia artists, and also serves as a communal space for interaction and dialogue.There are currently 15 artists and one artist-in-residence. TheSchläifmillennon-profit association manages the site and is responsible for building maintenance.
You can meet the artists and visit the workshops during the annual open weekend.
Sixthfloor in Koerich
TheSixthfloorart collective was set up in 2001 by six artist friendsin aformer sawmill in Koerich. They spent 18 months refurbishing the main hall to create artists' workshops and a shared exhibition space, the Piazza.
Neimillen(literally "new mill") is a locality in western Luxembourg, in the municipality of Koerich.Grain was ground here using the power of waterfrom 1795 until the end of the First World War.Records of the sawmill date back to 1900. It was modernised over time and subsequently ran on electricity untilit closed in 1991.
A group of seven artists now uses the old mill: Lukas Arons, Nadine Cloos, Tom Flick, Katarzyna Kot-Bach, Patrick Meyer, Joachim van der Vlugt and Wouter van der Vlugt. They use a wide range of techniques and materials including clay, wood, soft and hard stone, bronze, plaster, aluminium, acrylic and oil paints. They are known both as individual artists and also collectively as a group. Upcoming and establishedguest artistsregularly exhibit in the Piazza and share their work with Sixthfloor's loyal audience. Sixthfloor is financiallyindependentandself-supportingin all its activities.
Visitors can explore the site and meet the artists at regular art exhibitions, concerts and performances, as well as the three-yearlyMuse Symposiumdedicated to sculpture.
FerroForum in Esch-Schifflange
A centre for iron and steel expertise is housed in what was once the "Atelier Central" (central workshop) of the former Arbed Esch-Schifflange steelworks. FerroForum featured prominently in the programme of events for Esch2022 and is now a key stakeholder in thepreservation and promotion of cultural, industrial and artisanal heritage, as well asknow-how about iron and steel production.
FerroForumis aplace for meeting, dialogue and discovery that is open to the general public. It is aimed at anyone interested in the iron and steel industry, from artists to former steel workers, historians to students and many others. The main activities are:
The team, composed of around 20 people, meets two or three times a week torefurbish the site, prepare the programme of cultural events and workshops, and develop projects and collaboration with local, regional and international stakeholders.
If you have a keen interest in iron and steel, whether you have experiences or memories of the steel industry or simply want to find out more, feel free tocome along to the eventsorganised and (re)discover theSchmelzfor yourself.
Bâtiment4 in Esch-sur-Alzette
Bâtiment4, which stands on ArcelorMittal Luxembourg'sSchlassgoardsite, once housed the management team for the steelworks. ArcelorMittal Luxembourg has made the building available for three years to thefrEschassociation, which is involved in the implementation of Esch-sur-Alzette's cultural strategy. The redevelopment of the building, located on the edge of the former Esch-Schifflange industrial site,is part of broader efforts to turn the site into a new district that iscreative, family-friendly, dynamic and open.
The vast building, with a surface area of 3,000m2 and 5,000m2 of outside space, has become acultural "third place" for the public.It is managed by an independent collectivecomposed of the building's occupants and isbased on interaction and cooperationbetween these associations and members (which include Hariko, CELL, ILL, Richtung22 and others) and the public, witha variety of activities and workshops organised and open to everyone. The values ofBâtiment4 combine research and sharing, participation and transmission, artistic creation and culture, and social innovation and the green transition.
The site'spermanent residentsdevelop long-term projects, andexternal project leadersare also regularly given the opportunity to make use of the creative spaces.Guest artistsare invited for short-term residencies.A coordinating team reviews any applications to make sure that all occupants share the same values and aims."Facilitators" help develop linksbetween professional and amateur artists, collectives and individuals, and the public.
The site is open to visitors free of charge during normal opening times. Before going, make sure you check outthe agendato find out what events are coming up.
VEWA building in Dudelange
VEWA– theVestiaires-Wagonnage(changing rooms/wagon maintenance) building when the steel industry was at its height in Dudelange – isa site that has been the focus of (re)building and renovation for many months by a whole host of volunteers and local associations:DKollektiv,Fotoclub Diddeleng,Foodsharing,VELO Diddeleng, CEPA,Urban Gardenand Inter-Actions.These partners have now given VEWA a new lease of life, turning it into a creative space with activities and events that bring together artists, artisans and citizens.
Thevalues and criteriaupheld and promoted by those involved include knowledge sharing and transfer, interactions, experimentation, synergies, natural and human resources, industrial heritage, inclusion, a festive mindset, safety and vigilance, and political and ideological independence.
The site is home toa series of creative, dynamic spaces, including areas dedicated to graphic arts, photography, and wood and metal. It will be a key part of the newNeiSchmelzdistrict.
If you are interested injoining the associations involved in or based at VEWA and making an active contributionto this third place dedicated to culture and experimentation, check out the upcoming events in theagenda.
Schluechthausin Hollerich
The former abattoir in Luxembourg City, which closed in 1997, is set on a 2.5-hectare site.It now houses a skatepark, the Ambulance Service and the Canine Service of the Luxembourg Red Cross and storage facilities. It also serves as a gallery for the local and international graffiti scene.
As part of thePorte de Hollerichredevelopment project, Luxembourg City Councilis planning to repurpose theSchluechthausas a social and cultural space. With its typical 1930s architecture, the building bears witness to Luxembourg's industrial history and is partlyon the official list of buildings and objects considered part of the nation's cultural heritage.
A first open day was held in 2019 to gather ideas from citizens. This led to a number of suggestions, followed by a phase of urban and architectural programming that gave rise to a master plan containing four categories, each with associated spaces:
In 2023, following two reviews by the jury and a public consultation,the architectural consortium2001&CIVICandMersch Ingénieurs-Paysagisteswin a European architectural competition for the conversion and development of the former slaughterhouse. You can find more information on the progress of the project on the City of Luxembourgwebsite.
While waiting for the future site,sporting, cultural and intergenerationaleventsare being organised at theSchluechthaus. This pre-works period is being used as a test phase, to check whether the concepts planned meet the needs of the public.
In a second article,we will present the National Centre for Industrial Culture (CNCI) and its Chair, Marlène Kreins. The CNCI's goals include developing and repurposing industrial wasteland sites and promoting creative initiatives to achieve this aim.
Last update04.06.2025
For more information
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
From graffiti to street art in Luxembourg
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/slate-museum.html
The Slate Museum: learning and entertainment
Are you ready to travel back in time? So pay a visit to the Slate Museum in Haut-Martelange and immerse yourself in the realm of the Greater Region's 20th century slate industry. The museum gives you the opportunity to spend quality family time while learning about the country's industrial heritage. With the many activities available, both young and old will be able to learn in a playful manner (from the age of 4).
The museum offers anextensive range of activitiesyou can enjoy on-site:
During your tour, you'll be enchanted by themagic of the place.
Museum guided tours and workshops
For guided tours, you can choose from three options:
As part of the tour, you can discover the slate pathway: from its extraction to its conversion into a finished product and its transport. You can also explore the conditions of a slate worker of the time. But don't forget to wear closed shoes and a warm jacket, even in the summer, as it is chilly in the underground galleries!
You'll be able to let you creativity run wild during the various workshops offered in the Slate Museum.
You can choose among various options, for example:
You can participate in these workshops on your own, but group reservations are also available.
Slate was extracted on this industrial sitefrom 1790 to 1986, with an average production of12 million slatesper year. In 1890, the slate quarries and village houses were acquired by aGerman family of entrepreneursknown as theGebrüder Rother.
After being in operation foralmost 200 years, the industrial site slowly converted into a Slate Museum. In 1992, a fewaficionados of Luxembourg's industrial historyliving in the surrounding villagesfounded the not-for-profit organisationLes Amis de l'Ardoise(Slate Friends), which is fully made up of volunteers. Its mission is to preserve the memory of Luxembourg's slate heritage and to prevent the site from being forgotten. Armed with passion and committment, they converted the industrial site into a placewhere history comes to life.
Since 2019, this site has been managed by the not-for-profit organisationMusée de l'Ardoise, which was created bythe Luxembourgish government, thecommune of Rambrouchand the not-for-profit organisationLes Amis de l'Ardoise.
Events on an ongoing basis
Many other activitiesare organised on this exceptional almost20-acreindustrial site featuring22 buildings.
Get on a train that was rebuilt on theformer industrial path.
As part ofEn Dag an der Natur(a day in nature), you can explore thediverse flora of the slate quarryon awalkaround the wastelands of the site with a biologist (in French). You can then enjoy a drink made with ingredients found in the pit.
Do you fancy afamily cultural outing? On the museum's site, you can also recharge your batteries at theKoll an Aktiounmusic festival, where you'll find something for every taste. It is not only amusic festival, but also aculturalandfood festival.Concertsandshowsare on the programme, as well as anexhibition, acreators market,workshops for childrenandcooking activities. TheKoll an Aktiounoften takes place on Pentecost weekend and its programme is suitable for young and old alike.
If you have some free time, why not clear your mind at the Slate Museum on itsopen door day? You can visit the site forfreeon that day. TheChristmas Marketis another large event that is held on-site every year, around November. A wide range of items can be found there: decorations, presents and unique artisan products.
Take this opportunity to explore the surrounding area and local culture!The North of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourgfeatures many industrial sites that bear witness to theindustrial revolutionwhich left its mark on the country's history.TheÉislekregion is very well-known for its breathtakinggreen nature, itscultural wealthand, and itsremembrance tourism. It will be a pleasure to take a stroll amid the thickforests, deepvalleysand windyplateaus.
Op Visitt am Schiefermusée Haut-Martelange- Take a small trip to the Slate Museum Haut-Martelange (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update02.10.2024
For more information
A tour of Luxembourg museums
Luxembourg, a land of castles
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/music-concert-venues.html
Concert halls: an overview
Selecting the best concert halls in Luxembourg is a very delicate art. They are all emblematic, whether for their history, their location or their architecture. First of all, they all have a common vocation: to offer a magical show and an unforgettable moment to the audience. Here's an overview.
Rockhal
With itsthree concert halls, the Rockhal has been delighting music lovers since 2005. ItsMain Hallcan accommodate up to6,500 people, its Club 1,200 audiophiles and The Floor can hold up to 200 people.
Here at theRockhal, music is experienced without restraint. Especially in the main hall, several big names from all over the world have already performed in the place where once the furnaces dominated the industrial landscape.Alicia Keys, Pink, The Pet Shop Boys, Bruno Mars, A-ha, Ben Harper, and many other international bands and artiststo name but a few.
Technically, theRockhalmeets the standards and expectations of the entertainment industry. The Main Hall guarantees total flexibility for all kinds of productions. Thanks to its 17-metre height, events can be organised without any restrictions on performance. The stages and bleachers can be adapted to any desired configuration andmany different stage and seating arrangementsare possible for any type of event.
TheRockhalhas no less thansix rehearsal rooms, a recording studio, a dance room and a documentation centre. The small hall (Club) is mainly suitable for medium-sized concerts or for the production of various shows. The hall takes different forms and allows for configurations ranging from concerts to cabarets and private events.
So is theRockhalthe best concert hall in the Grand Duchy? The question is worth asking, as recently in 2020 the venue was awarded the TpBrands Award in the category 'Cultural Space'.
But we put the question to itsdirector, Olivier Toth, who describes the success of theRockhal.
Rockhal - Olivier Toth, director (Video/Audio YouTube)
Trifolion
Nothing beats amodern hall with good acousticsto enjoy a concert. Welcome to the Trifolion in Echternach. With around170 cultural, conference and social events every year, this cultural and congress centre also promotes the exchange of people of different nationalities. Other rooms can accommodateup to 1,000 visitors, all with excellent acoustics.
The Trifolion also offers, throughout the year, afestival programranging from classical music to jazz, as well as world music.
Maxime Bender, director of Trifolion
Cube 521
Since its opening in 2007, the Cube 521 - Regional House of Culture has seen some of the world's greatest musicians perform. Thisprestigious cultural centrein the north of the country offers aninterdisciplinary programme of music, dance and theatrethroughout the year.
Musicians from thefields of classical,jazzandworld musichave delighted thousands of audiophiles.
Leading internationala cappellaensembles move vocal music lovers with great performances and imaginative arrangements. Local groups use the forum for their musical performances and delight the audience with a varied repertoire.
Odile Simon, Director of Cube 521
Kulturfabrik
TheKulturfabrik, also known asKuFa, is located in aformer slaughterhouse dating from 1885-86. When the slaughterhouse closed in 1979, the building, which bears witness to the industrial architecture of the interwar period, quickly found new owners. The young actors of the non-profit organisation  'Theater GmbH' transformed the site into a rehearsal, performance and concert hall.
In 1996, theKuFaofficially became a cultural centre with asurface area of 4,500m2, including two performance halls, a cinema, an exhibition gallery, rehearsal rooms and a brasserie.
The alternative, regional and cross-border cultural centre offers anannual programme of over 200 events! You are probably familiar with the 'Flamencofestival Esch' or other festivals like 'Out of the Crowd' or 'Bang your head'.
René Penning, director of Kulturfabrik
Neimënster
Theformer Benedictine abbey ofNeumünsteris a unique area in theheart of theGrunddistrictfor unforgettable sound experiences. This open and friendly place was also used as a prison before becoming a cultural and meeting centre.
Today, the abbey hosts concerts, plays and artist residencies in its old stones, but also offers a number of free exhibitions that are open every day.
From the inner courtyard the visitor has a magnificent view of the fortress.
Ainhoa Achutegui, director the Abbey of Neumünster Cultural Exchange Center
Den Atelier
Den Atelier, a small concert hall with a capacity of around 1,200, is located intheRue de Hollerichinthe Central Station district. A former car garage,it was founded in 1995 by three friends with a passion for music and the lack of a concert venue dedicated to rock and independent music in the Grand Duchyat the time. The concept ofDen Atelierwas inspired by the alternative concert halls in Brussels, Amsterdam and Paris.
For 10 years,Den Atelieralso organised the biggest open-air festival in Luxembourg- Rock-a-Field in Roeser. Today,the team can boast of having organised some of the biggest shows and events in Luxembourg: Robbie Williams, Kings of Leon, Artic Monkeys, Sting and many more stars! To this end, concerts are organised outside the venue at theRockhal, inNeimënster, at the Wiltz Festival,OpderschmelzinDudelange, the Trifolion in Echternach and very recently in the LuxExpo car park! At the end of June,Den Atelierinvites you to Siren's Call - a festival of music and culture in the lower town.
David Bowie quoted by Michel Welter, Managing Partner Den Atelier (A-Promotions Sàrl)
Philharmonie
The Philharmonie isa real architectural feat. The imposing structure of823 slender white columnsenvelops thethree very different hallsin an elliptical shape. The real jewel is of coursethe large auditorium, which can hold up to 1,472 spectators. The corridors are bright, the lines are clear and the hall is acoustically optimised for the different types of concerts.
This is also the case for the smallest hall in the house, theEspace Découverte, which has a capacity of 180. With its bold curves and 313 seats, theChamber Music Hallprovides a setting for precise listening during chamber music evenings and recitals.
In short, the Philharmonie is a music lover's delight. But the Philharmonie deliberately opens itself up to a very wide audience, because its offer ranges from early music to remarkable creations, including jazz stars, world music discoveries, legendary DJs, traditional harmonies and young Luxembourg musicians and groups. More than 150,000 listeners come here every year.
OpderschmelzDudelange
Thesite of the former forgesof the city of Dudelange was revived in 2007. Since that year, the cultural centre 'Op der Schmelz' has been set up there. Open to all winds, it welcomes jazz concerts, thesinger-songwriter festival, world music, contemporary theatre and children's shows in its exceptional setting.
In addition to these events, the programme is very varied, ranging from pop, rock and blues music to theatre, dance, literary events and conferences.
The cultural centre also organises theTouch of NoirandLike a Jazz Machinefestivals and is responsible for the musical organisation of theZeltikfestival, theFête de la Musiqueand theSummerstage.
Rotondes
TheRotondesare the talk of the town when it comes to concerts in Luxembourg. This exceptional site consists oftwo former locomotive shedsat the capital's railway station.
Formerly dedicated to the railways, theRotondesnow give pride of place to artists in diametrically opposed genres. They offer events in the fields of performingarts, contemporary music and visual arts.
TheRotondesalso lend their walls to conferences and major social debates, participatory projects and workshops for all ages. As talent scouts, theygive an important place to young peopleand act as an incubator for new initiatives between culture and education.
Last update20.10.2025
Being a musician in Luxembourg
Classical music for you to enjoy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/ponts-luxembourg.html
Top 5: Bridges that must be crossed
Majestic in appearance, bridges span rivers and roads, overlook ravines and valleys, and dominate the landscape with their architectural beauty. Whether constructed in stone, metal or concrete, they embrace all styles and all historical periods. Luxembourg has 1,271 bridges and footbridges. They include arch bridges, girder bridges, cable-stayed bridges, slant-leg bridges and vault bridges. Some of these structures have an extensive and fascinating history, others are brand new and stand out due to their sheer size and contemporary architecture.
Pont Adolphe (Adolphe bridge)
Two hundred workers were employed on site. This was a majestic feat for the time. Let's travel back to thebeginning of the 20th century, or more accurately to the year 1900. This was the date when thepont Neuf (New bridge)or as it more commonly known - the pont Adolphe - was inaugurated. The name was given inhomage to Grand Duke Adolphe, who reigned from 1890 to 1905, and who laid the foundation stone of the bridge, on the city side, in 1900. All the stones used for the construction came from Luxembourg quarries, notably from Gilsdorf, Ernzen, Dillingen and Verlorenkost. You could say that this landmark structure is well and truly 'Made in Luxembourg'. Or almost. As the project was considered as a major structural engineering project, the government called upon a foreign engineer who was an expert in the field of large vaults, notably the FrenchmanPaul Séjourné.
Following three years of labour, the bridge wasopened for traffic in July 1903. It was the Charly tram, named after Charles Rischard, the Minister of Public Works at the time, that was one of the first vehicles to cross the bridge. Its railroad tracks, which traversed the bridge, led it all the way to Echternach.
Charly has long since been decommissioned. Moreover, the route was discontinued in 1954 and a new ultra-modern tram has been gliding across the century-old structure every three minutes since 2019. In order to accommodate the latest generation of trams, the pont Adolphe had to undergo a series ofrefurbishment works. The structure was strengthened, the width of the bridge was increased from 16 m to 18.70m and the pavements were widened in line with current traffic conditions.
However, despite the numerous metamorphoses it has undergone since its construction, the pont Adolphe has, in its own way, shaped the city's landscape with its unique silhouette. Its majestic double arch is a sight to behold and it spans across the 50-metre deepPétrusse valley.
Over time, this historic stone colossus has established itself as one of the capital's most popular tourist attractions. The building is a genuine star adorning postcards, photographs, film and drawings.
Pont Rouge (Red bridge)
The Grande-Duchesse Charlotte bridge is the largest bridge in the capital. It links the city centre to the European district on theKirchberg plateauand is 355 metres long.
It is commonly known as the Red bridge (Rout Bréck) in reference to its colour. However, it is officially named in honour of theGrand Duchess Charlotte of Luxembourg, who inaugurated the bridge in 1966.
The bridge was constructed following an international design contest launched by the government in 1957. At that time, the Grand Duchy had held the provisional seat of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) for several years. In order to promote the country as the definitive seat of the ECSC, the government decided to develop the Kirchberg plateau and link this area to the city centre.
TheGerman architect Egon Juxwas awarded the contract; he proposed to build aslant-leg steel bridge. Construction began in June 1963 and the works were completed two years later. Before opening for traffic, the bridge underwent an overload test involving twelve 42-ton tanks.
Between 2015 and 2018, major structural works were carried out in order to accommodate the tram. The bridge was widened, the railings were replaced, the road surface was reinforced andtwo tramway trackswere added.
The renovation of the bridge also included a new coat of paint to refresh its distinctive colour.
Béinchen
The Béinchenis a bridge which was part of the former fortress of Luxembourg in the Pfaffenthal district. The bridge has three small arches and was built between1684 and 1685based on a design byVauban. It connects the valley between the two towers of the gates of Eich and the Val des Bons-Malades.
Schiessentümpel
This iconic bridge, which today is a symbol of theMullerthalregion, only took four months to build between March and July1879. The wooden balustrade was added later. The bridge marks the border between the municipalities of Waldbillig and Consdorf.
Ieselsbréck
In the quaint village ofEhnenin the Moselle region, there is a famous stone bridgein the form of a donkey's backcalled Eselsbrücke. At the time, it gave the villagers an alternate route to their vineyards. The age of the bridge which traverses the Ehnerbach is unknown.
Pont Viaduc (Viaduct bridge)
During the past few centuries, the Petrusse river has seen several bridges arch over its banks, connecting the upper town of the capital to the surrounding areas. One of them is the Viaduct, an imposing structure that testifies to the genius of its designers: theengineers Edouard Grenier and Auguste Letellier. The Viaduct bridge was built by a British company between1859 and 1861.
Prior to its construction, the upper town was accessible via a wooden footbridge calledthe 'Passerelle'. With the number three having mythical associations, the Viaduct was given a third name'Vieux Pont' (old bridge); a moniker provided at the beginning of the 20th century following the construction of a new bridge (Adolphe bridge) in 1903.
A slight curvature in the middle of the bridge makes the Viaduct a unique structure. This was part of the defensive strategy of the time when the fortress was still in use: in the event of a siege, the bridge could have been shelled by cannonballs fired in a straight line from the Saint Esprit plateau.
However, during this period of upheaval, the Viaduct remained intact and today stands majestic over the valley at aheight of 45mand atotal length of 290m.
Viewed from below, the Old Bridge, with its immense vaults that form its 24 arches, resting on pillars measuring up to 30m high, appears even more grandiose. Underneath the bridge in the Pétrusse valley is a skateboard park, winding paths for joggers and a wooded landscape.
A gentle stream of water flows through the valley but it is above that the wave becomes more impressive, in particular the surge of thousands of cars passing over the Viaduct bridge each day.
As part of themodernisation of the transport networkof the City of Luxembourg, major structural works were undertaken in spring 2018. The bridge was widened by a few metres in order to create larger pavements for pedestrians, a cycle path, two-lanes for traffic and a bus lane to connect the city centre and the districts to the south.
The Schengen Viaduct
Of all the bridges in Luxembourg, this one is truly monstrous in size. It is600 metres long, 29 metres wide and the total surface area of the structure is 17,000m2. Spread over a challenging landscape, this bridge had to meet a series of requirements resulting from the particular morphology of the site. It took four years to complete the works.
InNovember 2002, the Schengen Viaduct finally opened to traffic, which can now travel between Germany and Luxembourg in the southeast of the country.
This motorway bridge runs alongside the Moselle and connects the German A8 nearPerl to Schengenvia the A13 in Luxembourg. As the Moselle is a shared and a common territory for both countries, this project was co-financed by Luxembourg and Germany. They split the construction costs on a pro-rata basis according to the route constructed in each country. Following an agreement between the two countries concerning the construction of the viaduct, it was decided that Luxembourg would be responsible for the design and construction, while Germany would be responsible for the maintenance.
The Viaduct considerably reduces travel time between Luxembourg and Saarbrücken. Moreover, it is intended to be the platform for mobility at thecrossroads of Germany-France-Luxembourgand foster relations, both physical and 
social, between these countries without borders.
Al Sauerbréck
If any bridge can claim to be one of the oldest structures in the country, it is unquestionably the Sauerbréck in Echternach. Thisbridge with four arches, which connects the Grand Duchy to Germany possibly dates back toRoman times. Although, this statement deserves a little closer attention, because the proof that the construction of this bridge bears the signature of Roman engineers has still not been confirmed to this day.
Despite the differences in opinions, the first reference to this rustic and solid stone bridge can be traced back to 1296 as 'Sur Brucke'. Furthermore, in a document written on 12 December 1462, it is stated that at that time, there was a very large bridge in Echternach, which crossed the Soure (Sûre). However, the bridge was in such a bad state it was said that it may not survive the winter.
And yet it did survive. Nevertheless,in the 17th century, it was in a terrible state. The second span was badly damaged and the fifth had collapsed. The sixth span was probably connected to the left bank by a drawbridge. In an engraving from 1867, one can still make out six spans. Owing to the construction of the Prince Heinrich railway at the end of the 19th century, the last arch on the bank of Echternach was filled.
During theSecond World War, a significant part of the bridge was destroyed in 1944. The final blow was delivered during the Rundstedt offensive.
However, like a phoenix rising from the ashes, a new bridge was built in1949. Named Sauerbréck, it has a wider central arch than its predecessor, ensuring improved water flow in the event of flooding. The statute on the bridge represents theabbot of Echternach Johannes Bertels(1544-1607).
Last update28.01.2025
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
Top 5: Famous people who have visited Luxembourg
Top 5: Secret gems in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/top5-monuments.html
Top 5: Monuments and statues to visit
As part of our Top 5 series, we'll reveal five monuments that are rich in history and should not be missed. No doubt, you already know the Gëlle Fra and the Grand-Duchess Charlotte monument. However, we'd like to examine other works of art that are regularly upstaged. These monuments and statues are less well-known but just as fascinating as their more popular competitors. Moreover, they await you in the four corners of the Grand Duchy.
Blannen Theis (1747-1824)
Standing proud at the foot of the church, at the entrance to thepedestrian area in Grevenmacheris the statue of Blannen Theis. This monument has almost become iconic for this city on the Moselle. Created by the Luxembourg artists Wil Lofy, it depicts the travelling singer and his dog.
This illustrious figure,baptised Mathias Schou,was born on 30th March 1747 in Grevenmacher. He wasblindor visually impaired, hence the name 'de blannen Theis'.
Mathias Schou was a well-knownminstrelin the region. At the time, it was common to employ travelling singers to entertain the crowds at village festivals or family parties. Thus, he travelled from village to village and serenaded the locals at markets, marriages or fairs with his violin and organ grinder. He was always accompanied by his wife Margaretha Kummer, calledMimi Gréit. Following her death, he was joined on his travels by his second wife Barbara Kremer, calledBärbeland his dog.
During themusical performances at village fetes, Mathias Schou was the first to sing folk songs in Luxembourgish, such asZu Arel op der Knippchen(On the hill in Arlon),De klenge Männchen(The little man) andD'Meedche zu Gëtzen(The girl from Goetzingen); these songs remain popular to this day. Sometimes, he would take his accordion to play while people sang, danced and jumped up and down to the music.
The Luxembourgish poet Edmond de la Fontaine, called Dicks, devoted a place in Luxembourg literature to him when he penned his poemDe blannen Theis.
The minstrel of Grevenmacher died penniless in the village of Eich, located just outside the capital, in 1824. In honour of its former citizen, the municipality of Grevenmacher commissioned astatue by the Luxembourg artist Wil Lofy in 1991. The only image of Mathias Schou is a drawing in pencil, which belongs to the Nationalmusée um Fëschmaart. This drawing was also portrayed on astampissued by the Post.
Princess Amélie (1830-1872)
Themunicipal park in Luxembourg cityis without a doubt the green lungs of the capital. In the lower part of this oasis is theEdmond Klein park. Here, a pond, water jets and waterfalls inspire a sense of relaxation, under the watchful gaze of thesculpture of Princess Amélie.
But who was this princess to whom we have dedicated a three-metre high monument atop a Vosges granite base?
Amélie Marie da Gloria of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach was the secondwife of Prince Henry of the Netherlands. His brother, King William III, entrusted him to govern Luxembourg from 1850 to 1879.
She wasborn in 1830and very early in her life she already had brief contacts with Luxembourg through her father, Duke Bernard of Saxe-Weimar, who was appointed Governor General of the Grand Duchy by King William I.
Princess Amélie met her future husband on the island of Madeira in 1847. Following their marriage in Weimar in 1853, they took up residence inWalferdange castlelater that year.
The young princess was described as intelligent and cultured and soon won over the hearts of the population owing to her innate sense of genuine values and charity work.
In fact, it was herentreatment of the tsar Alexander IIfor which she received her letters of nobility. In 1867, she travelled to St Petersburg to plead for the independence of Luxembourg; this independence was, at the time, under grave threat from Napoleon III.
PrincessAmélie died in 1872following a lung infection.
In memory of Princess Amélie, a monument in her effigy was placed at the entrance of the park. The solemn inauguration took place on 30th October 1876.
Wil Lofy
It was in 1937 that the Forge du Sud witnessed the birth of the great artist Wil Lofy. In 1959 he leftEsch-sur-Alzette, his place of birth,and went to study in Florence, Sesto Fiorentino and later at the Academy of Fine Arts in Paris. Wil Lofy is a multifaceted artist! He practises various forms of art, in particular drawing, painting and sculpture.
These days, a large number of his fine art works adornpublic spaces. These includeBlannen Theisin Grevenmacher, Bacchus - the god of wine – sitting atop his barrel on the esplanade in Remich, and Maus Ketti - the defiant mouse – which is on display in Burmerange and Mondorf-les-Bains.
In addition to these works, let us not forget, amongst others, the famous fountainHämmelsmarschat the entrance of the pedestrian area in the city centre as well asLa laitière d’Ettelbruckand the monument in memory of Josy Barthel and Nicolas Frantz in Mamer.
Diekirch and its donkeys
Diekirch is known as the'City of donkeys'. This animal can be found throughout the city, in every little nook and cranny, as well as on public squares and in pedestrian areas. These include thefountain of donkeysin the pedestrian area, designed by the sculptor Bonifatius Stirnberg from Aachen, and the monuments in honour of the donkeys - such asthe ducat donkey- and there is even a donkey perched on the roof of the church in the form of aweather vane. But why is the donkey the mascot of the city of Diekirch?
To this day, several stories exist to explain this phenomenon... For over 200 years, historians have struggled to establish its origin. Legend has it that the residents of Diekirch opposed plans to make the city main axis of therailway line between Troisvierges and Luxembourg city. In the capital of the Grand Duchy, the authorities accused the 'donkeys of Diekirch' of misjudging the signs of the times.
Another possible explanation seems a little more realistic: Long ago, the farmers relied on donkeys to cultivate their land in Herrenberg, the hill overlooking the city of Diekirch. The donkey was the only suitable companion able towork the fieldson the hillsides surrounding the city.
But, never mind the legend... The monuments of the donkeys and their history now form an integral part of the heritage of the city of Diekirch. They are, without a doubt, worthy of your attention in the capital of donkeys!
Maus Ketti
D’Maus Kettiremains one of the most popular works of Luxembourg literature. It tells the story of Ketti the mouse, who lives a frugal life in thefields of Burmerange, a small picturesque village in the south of Luxembourg. One day, she becomes enthralled about delicious food available in the city and goes to visit her richcousin Mim in Clausen, a suburb of the capital, and finds these fancy delicacies, which she readily devours.
In the city, the two mice break into a house and feast upon the food laid out on a beautifully set table.
All of a sudden,Tunn the catappears with his little friend and tries to catch the two mice, who just manage to escape. Ketti gets the shock of her life and takes the decision to return immediately to her home in Burmerange. From that point on, she resolves to live an austere life and eat simple food rather than living a life of greed and daily anxiety.
Thefictional story, which compares rural life and urban life and the lessons that can be learned from the two, was written and published in 1936 by the lawyer and politicianAuguste Liesch(1874-1949). Based on thefable by the famous Greek poet Esope(600 B.C.), the Ketti mouse poem remained part of the national curriculum for several decades in many primary schools in Luxembourg.
The municipality of Burmerange named itscultural centreafter the rural mouse and theParc Merveilleux in Bettembourghas an exhibition which tells the story of the mouse with dancing and speaking characters.
Which mouse would you like to be?
Bacchus
The long, seemingly endlessesplanades, the warm and welcomingterracesand thepicturesque pathways running alongside the Mosellegive the city ofRemichthe feel of a seaside resort - especially in summer. However, above all, it is the delicious produce harvested from its vineyards that continues to entice a stream of visitors to the town.
In Remich, wine is a way of life and a culture in itself, to such an extent that it has inspired artists and architects alike. Thesculpture of Bacchusis a perfect example. Halfway along the esplanade is the fountain in honour of theRoman god of wine, sat on top of a barrel that spins on another barrel.
In his right hand, Bacchus grasps a bottle of wine; in his left hand he holds a glass. Water from the fountain gushes out of these two symbolic objects. Bacchus was the god of vines, wine, festivities, dance, vegetation and the natural pleasures of life. This homage to the Roman god is thework of the Luxembourgish artist Wil Lofy.
The coat of arms of Luxembourg as well as the name of STAD REIMECH are depicted on the barrel of the fountain. Passers-by can sit on the benches around the fountain, relax and admire Bacchus in all his glory while enjoying a pleasant moment in the shade of the weeping willows. During the height of summer, it is the perfect spot to cool down, especially on a hot day.
Last update28.01.2025
For more information
Promenade architecturale à Esch-sur-Alzette
Luxembourg, un pays de châteaux
Patrimoine rosier du Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/luxembourg-rose-growing-heritage.html
Luxembourg's rose-growing heritage
Did you know that Luxembourg was referred to as Rose Country in the late 19th and early 20th century? In 1855, two young gardeners began specialising in rose growing in Limpertsberg. The remarkable creations cultivated in their nursery won a host of international prizes and the business soon flourished. Their success paved the way for other companies, and by the early 1900s Luxembourg had become a centre for rose breeding, with more than 260 new rose varieties developed in the country!
The golden age of Luxembourg roses: from Limpertsberg to the world
TheLimpertsbergdistrict is inseparable from roses in Luxembourg. Abrief look at the historical backgroundcan give us a clearer idea as to why the first rose-growing entrepreneurs chose this particular spot. Following the Congress of Vienna in 1815 and the London Conference in 1838, Luxembourg's neutrality and independence were secure. The former military areas around the glacis and Limpertsberg, where no building projects had been permitted for strategic reasons, were now available, and those visionaries began moving to the area in the 1850s.
Jean Soupert and Pierre Nottingwere two young gardeners who specialised in rose growing, and they set up their nursery in 1855. Their outstanding creations won several prizes in international competitions and attracted wealthy customers looking for the luxuries of the time. Other rose breeders then began to move to Limpertsberg: the Ketten brothers and Charles Gemen, together with Soupert and Notting, were the most widely known, well beyond the borders of Luxembourg.
By 1900, the roses grown in Luxembourg were exported all over the world, up to 10 million plants each year! They catered to a prestigious clientele including kings, princes and presidents... Roses from Luxembourg even adorned the garden of the Tsar in St Petersburg!
TheFirst World Warbrought the heyday of Luxembourg roses to an end. The lack of male workers and the financial difficulties experienced by customers contributed to the decline, but the main reason was the political and economic embargo imposed on a country that was part of theDeutsche Zollverein. As a member of the German Customs Union since 1842, Luxembourg was seen as an enemy country. French customers, who before the war represented approximately 75% of the rose growers' sales, no longer dared place their orders, and the market collapsed.
The post-war economicrecession, phylloxera in the 1920s – which attacked roses and vines all over Europe – and theSecond World Warsounded thedeath knell for the golden age of Luxembourg roses.
Resurgence of the rose tradition in Luxembourg
The love story between the people of Luxembourg and their roses was too strong to fade away without a trace, despite the setbacks. Since the1980s, several collectives have rekindleda passion for roses.
TheLëtzebuerger Rosefrënnassociation, set up in 1980 to promote rose growing, was responsible for developing arose garden at the Munsbach Castlein 2017. The garden is accessible to the public free of charge all year round, so make sure you don't miss it!
The main aim of thePatrimoine roses pour le Luxembourgassociation is to revive Luxembourg's rose-growing tradition in people's minds, hearts and gardens. It offers training sessions on how to prune roses, tours of rose gardens and initiatives to raise awareness of this rich heritage among young people.
Have you heard of Anne Beffort?
Born in Neudorf in 1880,Anne Beffortwas a pioneer. She was the first female secondary school teacher in Luxembourg and the first Luxembourgish woman to obtain a doctorate, in 1909. She also co-founded theLycée de Jeunes Fillesin Luxembourg.
The rose-growing community recently decided to honour her memory: in commemoration of the 100th anniversary of her appointment as Luxembourg's first female secondary school teacher in 1919,Patrimoine roses pour le Luxembourgnamed arose in her honour. TheAnne Beffort roseis a climbing, fragrant variety, salmon pink, a prolific bloomer and highly resistant – a fitting tribute to a formidable woman.
The legacy of Luxembourg's rose tradition today, in Limpertsberg and in everyday life
You have probably strolled past the former rose gardens in Limpertsberg without even realising it. The nurseries of internationally acclaimed rose breeders such as Soupert-Notting, Ketten and Gemen were once found betweenAvenue de la FaïencerieandAvenue Victor Hugo.
Although these plantations no longer exist, the district still bears the legacy of Luxembourg's rose-growing heyday. TheRosaLi circular walkis a great way of exploring this heritage. For example:
Limpertsberg is not the only place withrose gardens: other fine examples are open to visitors in Mersch, Mondorf, Walferdange and Esch-sur-Alzette.
Roses also find their way into our daily lives in the most unexpected places – for example in theBeurre Roseproduced by Luxlait, with its protected designation of origin recipe that has stayed the same since 1932.
Luxembourg's rose tradition is clearly very much alive and well... and the future is looking decidedly rosy!
Last update11.03.2026
For more information
Landscape heritage: union between culture and nature
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/luxembourgs-architectural-heritage-i-esch-sur-alzette.html
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. In this first article on the built heritage, we suggest an architectural walk inEsch-sur-Alzette. So put on some comfortable shoes, and you might even like to bring along a pair of binoculars to check out the intricate details in these open-air historical sites!
Esch-sur-Alzette- an unsuspected melting-pot of European architecture
A bit of historybefore you start out on this architectural walk. AlthoughEsch-sur-Alzettewas first mentioned in 773, it was Henri IV, Count of Luxembourg, who granted the town its freedom in 1287.Esch-sur-Alzettewas fortified in 1311, then dismantled in 1671; its growth is largely due to the discovery in 1838 ofminetteiron ore. Thereafter the rural village became a prosperous industrial centre, striding forward. 1906 was a key year, marked by the implementation of the Wirtz-Krasnick scheme, which laid down the alignment of the town's streets. This was followed in 1924 by the improvement scheme and new districts designed by the German town planner Joseph Stübben.
Throughout these years the initiators were German, Belgian and French as well as Luxembourgish, and the influences of Germanic and Latin architecture are evident.
That makesEsch-sur-Alzettea real melting-pot of European architecture. This5kmwalk will show you a number of architectural expressions connected withHistoricism,Art Nouveau,Modernism,Functionalismandcontemporary architecture.
The starting point for the walk proposed by theEscher Infofabrik– the tourist reception and information office of the town of Esch – is theBerwart Tower(1721), which used to be the entrance porch to the baroque chateau of the lords of Berwart.Past, present and futurestand side by side at this first stage of the walk: next to the tower, two modern galleries lead to an administrative building – belonging nowadays to Arcelor Mittal – with a 1995 metal structure which was awarded the first European prize for the best steel construction.
It would be impossible to give details here of the 34 stopping points on the walk; here is a small selection representing the different styles to be discovered:
Avirtual walkincluding the main sites is also available thanks to the University of Luxembourg's Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (C2DH). This is a series of videos showing the development of the main town in the iron ore region, and its buildings. A visit not to be missed, from the comfort of your armchair!
Historical and architectural guide to Esch-sur-Alzette – Rue de l'Alzette (Part 1) (Video/Audio)
Virtual walk in the rue de l'Alzette of the historical and architectural guide Esch-sur-Alzette of the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (in French). © C2DH / Université du Luxembourg.
Guide historique et architectural Esch-sur-Alzette - Villa Olivo (Video/Audio)
Discover the Villa Olivo in the historical and architectural guide Esch-sur-Alzette of the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (in French). © C2DH / Université du Luxembourg.
National Institute for Architectural Heritage
Luxembourg's history can be seen in the facades of the many buildings that are protected and preserved as part of the country's architectural heritage. The various criteria used for determining and then promoting the built heritage need to be objective; in the Grand Duchy they are decided on by theNational Institute for Architectural Heritage: Heritage sites may be chosen because they are ancient, they hold particular interest in terms of architecture and history of art, they are particularly rare, they serve as a place of remembrance or they are highly typical. The procedure is intended to guarantee the selection of a series of architectural sites that represents the country's cultural identity.
Page 1 |2
Last update09.03.2026
For more information
Architectural walk around Luxembourg City
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/luxembourg-architectural-heritage-ii-luxembourg-city.html
Architectural walk around Luxembourg City
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to explore on foot. In this second article about the country's architectural heritage, we take you on an architectural walk around Luxembourg City. So make sure you're wearing comfortable shoes, and why not bring along a pair of binoculars to check out the intricate details of these open-air historical sites!
Luxembourg City: three districts with a rich history
Message to walkers: Luxembourg's capital may be small, but every district has examples of architectural heritage that you won't want to miss, especially as the city spansa thousand years of history! The architectural walk we have designed takes you from the station district (quartier Gare) to the European district of Kirchberg, via the city centre (Ville Haute). But this is just a small selection to whet your appetite!
Station district
Thestation orGaredistrictcontains severallate 19th-centuryandearly 20th-centurybuildings. The district began to be developed following Luxembourg's declaration of neutrality as decided by the 1867 Treaty of London and the dismantling of the fortress.
Luxembourg Central Railway Station(gare centrale) is the starting point for our walk. The current station building, which dates back to1907, is flanked by a tall clock tower. The façades reflect theBaroque style of the Moselle region. Don't miss the gable decorations – a symbol of national sovereignty – on the main hall and the prince's pavilion.
Just opposite, theAlfa hotel, currently under renovation, is an excellent example of theArt Decostyle. Built in1930, the façade features decorative elements that are typical of Art Deco, including geometric motifs and triangular balconies.
We'll now head up to thePlace de Paris, which marks the southernmost tip of theBourbon Plateau. It was seen as the gateway to the avenue, with its two corner buildings on the north side, including theParis Palacehotel and restaurant, stronglyinfluenced by the French style, builtbetween 1909 and 1912.
There are two other important buildings to point out before we continue on to the Upper Town (Ville Haute). The first is the formeradministrative headquarters of ARBED, builtfrom 1920 to 1922. This palace with four wings, resembling an aristocratic residence, was built to demonstrate the power and influence of the steel group. You will notice several ornamental details reflecting science, trade and industry. A little further on we come to the head office of a bank, theCaisse d'Épargne de l'État et du Crédit Foncier, now theBanque et Caisse d'Épargne de l'État. Work on the building took place between1910 and 1933. It reflects theFirst French Renaissancestyle with elements ofArt Nouveau.
The station district is linked to the Upper Town by the imposingAdolphe Bridge, builtfrom 1900 to 1903over the Pétrusse valley. With a huge arch spanning 84.65m and a height of 16.2m from the base to the keystone, for many years it was the largest stone bridge in the world!
Upper Town district
We are now in theUpper Towndistrict, orVille Haute. This district has a rich architectural heritage, with many outstanding buildings. Make sure you don't miss the following gems:
Kirchberg district
Do you fancy a change of style and some morecontemporary architecture? Then you'll need to head toKirchberg. On foot or bybike, cross the Grand Duchess Charlotte Bridge – known as the Red Bridge – until you reach thePlace de l'Europedesigned by Ricardo Bofill in 2004, a striking architectural landmark which features:
A stroll along avenue John F. Kennedy will take you past a host of contemporary buildings, including most of theEuropean institutions based in Luxembourg. This young, modern and constantly changing district is a fascinating architectural backdrop to finish off your walk – and after all that exercise it's definitely time for a refreshing drink!
National Institute for Architectural Heritage
Luxembourg's history can be seen in the facades of the many buildings that are protected and preserved as part of the country's architectural heritage. The various criteria used for determining and then promoting the built heritage need to be objective; in the Grand Duchy they are decided on by theNational Institute for Architectural Heritage: Heritage sites may be chosen because they are ancient, they hold particular interest in terms of architecture and history of art, they are particularly rare, they serve as a place of remembrance or they are highly typical. The procedure is intended to guarantee the selection of a series of architectural sites that represents the country's cultural identity.
Page1| 2
Last update09.03.2026
For more information
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/landscape-heritage.html
Landscape heritage: union between culture and nature
People enjoy to unwind in the historical parks and gardens that are part of Luxembourg's heritage. These green monuments express the intrinsic relationship between civilisation and nature, and bear witness of a culture, a style, an era or a designer. They are living spaces that form an essential element of individual and social well-being, and Luxembourg is duly protecting them.
Historical parks and gardens: natural, cultural and social heritage
A historical park or garden is anarchitectural composition and plant arrangementwhich is of public interest from ahistoricalorartisticpoint of view. As their architecture is mainly plant-based, these arelivingareas and the way they look is derived from a constantbalancebetween seasons, nature's development or artistic will.
Therefore, visiting parks and gardens is just like visiting a monument or museum. They also represent aresource to regenerate the planetin the face of the climate emergency.
We are convinced that parks and gardensplay an essential role in individual and collective well-beingand we invite you to visit them!
The value of these sites and the importance of maintenance, conservation, restoration and restitution actions is so significant that they benefit from specific regulations: the Florence Charter, adopted in 1982, stemming from the International Council on Monuments and Sites, and the European Landscape Convention of the Council of Europe, that was signed in the year 2000.
Paradises meant to be seen and visited
Historical parks and gardens are, by their very nature and vocation, peaceful places that promote contact with, the silence of and listening to nature, but they are meant to be seen and visited.
Luxembourg Cityis home to several parksscattered across its various neighbourhoods.
Boasting an English style, themunicipal parkwas set up between 1871 and 1878 by the landscape engineer Édouard André. Following works that consisted in dismantling the ramparts of the ancient fortress city, planned by the 1867 Treaty of London, the government wanted to create a park of approximately 50 acres.
Why have a municipal park back then? On the one hand, because beautifying was a trend in Paris after the 1867 Paris Universal Exhibition, and this had an influence on Luxembourg. On the other hand, there was a will to regulate property prices. But it was in particular owed to modern urban planning. Apark filled with historyandaccessible 24/7.
In theGuttlandregion,Ansembourg Castlefeatures gardens that were laid out as early as 1750. They are bedecked with statues, decorative stairs and fountains. Its standard terraced gardens had their glory days in the mid-18th Century. They also had anorangerywith a remarkable number of varieties of fruit, medicinal herbs and flowers. Two plants of that era still exist: the large plane-tree and a tree tunnel that run along the river.
The castle is a private property, but the gardens can be visited. You therefore have the opportunity to take a stroll in the historical garden during its opening hours,from 9a.m. to the sunset, except on days where the site is rented out.Check closing days before you go!
In theMullerthalregion, themunicipal park and the gardens of Echternach Abbeyawait you!
As part of the abbey's reconstruction in the 18th Century, great emphasis was placed on planning the surrounding areas of new buildings. The creation of a garden featuring anorangerydates back to 1736. The cross-shaped paths and the central water basin reveal the signature of the architect Léopold Durand who drew up the plans. The park and gardens areopen 24/7.
Luxembourg – a history of roses
Did you know that Luxembourg used to be known as theCountry of Rosesin the good old days? In fact, in 1855, two young gardeners specialised in rose cultivation in their tree nursery based inLimpertsberg. Their remarkable creations were not only awarded many international prizes, but also led to economic success as they would attract wealthy customers in pursuit of luxury items of the times. The success story was such that other businesses were created and Luxembourg became a hotbed of rose cultivation, with over 260 varieties of new roses!
If you are passionate about roses, theLimperstberg rose walkwill certainly be worth your while. We also recommend you discover the roses of the gardens that the associationPatrimoine roses pour le Luxembourg(literally 'rose heritage for Luxembourg') suggests visiting, all over the country.
The rose garden ofMunsbach Castleis also a must. The rose garden was created by the associationLëtzebuerger Rousefrënn(Luxembourg rose friends) in collaboration with the commune of Schuttrange, on a plot of land at the foot of the castle. The garden is open to the public all the time, free of charge!
Last update12.03.2026
For more information
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Luxembourg, a land of castles
Luxembourg's rose-growing heritage
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/museums.html
A tour of Luxembourg museums
Do you like museums? The Grand Duchy offers you not only the must-see museums dedicated to history and the arts, but also those devoted to iron mines, brewing art and the rural world. Over 60 museums across the country have a unique and rewarding experience in store for you. Come with us!
Museum(s)mile - a big smile for a small mile
Would you like towalk through history and art?Luxembourg Cityoffers a stroll round seven museums: it's not just that they are nearby; they are very diverse, and housed in unusual spaces forming an arc in the shape of a smile.
Five of these places, in the heart of the city, are easily accessible on foot:
Once you've visited these museums, you can move on to theDräi Eechelen Park, a 15-minute walk from the city centre, to visit theDräi EechelenMuseum -  Fortress, History and Identities, and the museum of modern art:Musée d'art moderne Grand-Duc Jean– MUDAM Luxembourg.
Museum Night and Luxembourg Museum Days, be-there annual events
Every year, the seven museums in the Museum(s)mile organise one of the key events in the Grand Duchy:Museum Night, which is always held during thesecond weekend in October. For one night, visitors are able to discover museums in Luxembourg City and take advantage of a wide-ranging programme that includes workshops, tasty gourmet offerings, and even night-time DJ sessions! It's a great opportunity to experience museums in a convivial, fun way.
In spring, don't miss theLuxembourg Museum Days. During one weekendaround 18th May– International Museum Day – about forty museums offer free admission and present varied cultural programmes for the whole family.
A scattering of museums to suit all tastes
Do you like beer? Then don't miss theNational Brewery Museumin Wiltz. As well as finding out about this ancient century-old tradition in the Grand Duchy, you will be able to visit the nearbyUpper Sûre Nature Parkwith its fields of spelt, the cereal used to make certain beers.
Want to find out about iron and steel in the Grand Duchy's past? TheNational Mining Museum, in Rumelange, is a great choice. The museum pays tribute to the miners' hard work and serves as a reminder of a key period in the Grand Duchy's history. Iron-ore mining was in fact the foundation not only for the country's prosperity in the 20th century, but also for its cultural diversity, with the arrival of large numbers of immigrants to work in the mines.
Aficionados of European history will enjoy visiting theEuropean Museum Schengenas well as discovering the other features of theMoselle region.
There's a lot on offer - take a look at the information on museums available on the portalvisitluxembourg.com.
Museums for all
Most of the museums in the Museum(s)mile offer eithervisits free of chargeto their permanent exhibitions orreduced pricesor evening openings free of charge once a week. At the Casino Luxembourg, entry to all areas is free. And the free entry to the MUDAM on Wednesday evenings has become a popular way of viewing contemporary art and enjoying the café's ambiance.
You can also visit museums as a family, or suggest creative activities for yourchildrenat these cultural institutions. If your children like stories about history, they will enjoy theevents for young people at the Nationalmusée um Fëschmaart. And if they are budding scientists and enjoy experimenting, theleisure activities at the National Museum of Natural Historyare a good choice.
The Grand Duchy's museums have embraced digital technology in recent years. This means that people withspecial needscan still enjoy museum collections. It's possible, for example, to visit the Nationalmusée um Fëschmaart via a series ofimmersive interactive visits in 3Dand thevirtual exhibitions available on the museum's website.
Last update04.06.2025
For more information
Luxembourg, a land of castles
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Edward Steichen
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/on-stage.html
Discovering the performing arts in Luxembourg
Are you a theatre, dance or opera lover? Are you looking for the latest productions of internationally consolidated companies as well as willing to discover the national panorama? The Grand Duchy's various theatres and cultural centres offer a range of performances that will surely meet your expectations. A diverse multilingual programme reflecting the country's cultural diversity awaits you. Follow us!
Opera, dance and theatre in the city
Internationallyacclaimed companies and (co-)productions appear on the stages of theGrand Théâtrethroughout the year. The main theatre room features 950 seats and can host large-scale performances, such as major opera production sets and musical theatres. The Studio is a smaller room which can be converted according to the performance's needs, making it ideal for more intimate experiences.
Thisproximitywith actors is also one of the main features of theThéâtre des Capucins: with small performances that mean that you can come closer to the essence of the acting and experimentation. If you are visiting Luxembourg in spring, do not miss theTalentLab: 10 days of creation, shows, encounters and exchanges around the topic of theatre research and creation.
If you are looking for the showcase ofnational drama, theThéâtre national du Luxembourgis the right place for you. The fact that this theatre also has a real European vocation means that it often invites internationally acclaimed artists to take part in Luxembourgish productions and co-productions.
Performing arts are also predominant inNeimënster's programme of events!
From one end of the country to the other
Although major international productions are usually performed in Luxembourg City, theatres and cultural centres are scattered from one end of the country to the other and offer a diverse programme of quality.
On the edge of the Ardennes, theCentre des arts pluriels Ettelbruck(CAPe)offers around a hundred events per season and constitutes a solid springboard for emerging talent and new Luxembourgish creations.
Moreover, theMunicipal theatre in Esch-sur-Alzetteis a must if you are visiting the south of the country. Its renovated technical facilities have attracted the most demanding companies as well as daring productions with more experimental scenography.
Multilingual performances for full integration
If performing arts and theatre in particular are essential to your personal development but you haven't yet mastered Luxembourg's three official languages, don't worry. In fact, one of the major positive characteristics of Luxembourg's theatres is their multilingualism. You can enjoy a wide range of performances inEnglish, Portuguese or Italian, as well as inFrench, German or Luxembourgish.
Performances for children
Luxembourg's cultural actors are well aware of the importance of making artistic creations accessible to children. As a result,many performances aimed at children and young people are programmed in almost every theatre room. Theatre plays a major role for the development of an open-minded, curious and empathetic society.
Since its inception, theRotondeshave paid particular attention to school-going audiences through their programme that covers all the levels of education from preschool to secondary school. Children and teenagers can not only enjoy performances such as circus creations, but also actively take part in them through organised workshops.
In the capital as well,Neumünster Abbeyoffers a specialmultilingual programme for schools.
In central Luxembourg, theCentre des arts pluriels Ettelbruckand theMierscher Theaterhave been offering a programme for children and families known asCakusince 2007. Performances in various languages await little ones from the age of three!
Last update20.05.2025
For more information
Luxembourg, a land of castles
A tour of Luxembourg museums
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/castles.html
Luxembourg, a land of castles
Visiting the castles scattered throughout Luxembourg is the ideal opportunity to plunge into the country's history, but also to discover exhibitions, enjoy medieval and music festivals, and even hike through natural areas. Here is our selection!
Witnesses to history
Situated in the heart of Western Europe, Luxembourg's territory has often been coveted by great powers. To protect itself from invasions, many fortifications were built over the centuries, which today represent a rich heritage not to be missed by history enthusiasts. Indeed,1,000 years of history and more than 70 castlesare waiting for you in Luxembourg!
Here is a small selection of these magnificent buildings that we invite you to explore.
There's a lot on offer - take a look at the information on castles and fortifications available on the portalvisitluxembourg.com.
A book to discover the feudal and fortified heritage in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
Between 2010 and 2020, the National Sites and Monuments Service has carried out around one hundred restoration and enhancement projects for the Grand Duchy's architectural heritage. A large part of these projects concerned the feudal and fortified heritage, namely castles and the remains of the Luxembourg fortress.
Among these projects, 12 have been chosen to illustrate the book "XII – Patrimoine féodal et fortifié au Grand-Duché de Luxembourg". This is a largely photographic work, which focuses on the goals and methods of the works carried out on the following sites: Mont Saint-Jean Castle in Dudelange, Brandenbourg Castle, Rham Fortifications in Luxembourg, Rumigny Fort in Luxembourg, Clervaux Castle, Esch-sur-Sûre Castle, Bourscheid Castle, Beaufort Castle,Hielepaartin Luxembourg, Koerich Castle, Bourglinster Castle and Vianden Castle.
The book has been published with the support of the Ministry of Culture and National Sites and Monuments Service as part of the 25th anniversary of the inscription of the old quarters and fortifications of the City of Luxembourg on the UNESCO World Heritage List. It is now available in the shops of theErnsterbookshop and at theNationalmusée um Fëschmaartfor 22 euros. Not to be missed if you are passionate about castles, history and photography!
Culture within castles
Thecastle of Clervauxis nowadays a high place ofphotographyin Luxembourg. It hosts the exhibition "The Family of Man", a remarkable collection of documentary art photographs collected byEdward Steichen, which is listed in the UNESCO' s Memory of the World Register.
Each summer, fans ofconcerts, theatre nights and art performancesare expected atWiltz castle. The amphitheatre hosts theWiltz Festival, featuring international artists, Luxembourg premieres and hybrid productions combining various arts. Shows are available for all audiences!
Lovers ofmedieval festivalsandchildrenwill delight in the medieval festivals organised by many Luxembourg castles, such as Bourscheid, Useldange, Beaufort and Vianden.
Discover the castles on a hike
Want to explore the country's history while staying active? Then theValley of the Seven Castlesis the perfect getaway. Discover the Eisch valley and its seven castles: Mersch, Schoenfels, Hollenfels, the old and new castles of Ansembourg, Septfontaines and Koerich. Through a37km national hiking trail, capture not only the history but also the landscape of theGuttlandregion.
Besides, if you don't have the time to walk the whole trail, then take this27km circuitand make a few stops by car.
Last update17.03.2025
For more information
A tour of Luxembourg museums
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
History
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture/unesco-heritage-luxembourg.html
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Are you a fan of UNESCO tourism? In Luxembourg, you'll find impressive architecture, inspirational photography, unique dances, as well as traditions, music and nature. With the recent recognition of one new heritage at the end of 2024, the country now has ten certified treasures covering a wide range of fields: World Heritage, Intangible Heritage, Memory of the World, Biosphere Reserves and Global Geoparks.
World heritage - Luxembourg City, old quarters and fortifications
Given its strategic position in the heart of Western Europe, from the 16th century until 1867 when its walls were dismantled, theFortress of Luxembourgwas one ofEurope's greatest fortified sites. In fact, the country was coveted by great powers for a long time and the city witnessed many transfers of powers: the emperors of the Holy Empire, the House of Burgundy, the House of Hapsburg, French and Spanish kings and finally the Prussians. Consequently, the fortifications underwent a wide range of reinforcement work for several centuries and, at present, represent asplendid example of military architecture.The old town and fortificationshave been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1994.
A walk through the remains of the old fortress offers an opportunity to explore the Grund and theBock rock with its casemates. Since 2019, this heritage sitecan also be visited by bike, by following a 9.5km route through the Pétrusse valley and the Clausen and Pfaffenthal districts of the city.
Memory of the World - "The Family of Man" photography exhibition
"The Family of Man" is an exhibition of legendary photography that has been on the Memory of the World Register since 2003.It was created by Luxembourg-born photographerEdward Steichenfor the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York.It consists of 503 photographs by 273 photographers from 68 countries, including renowned artists such as Henri Cartier-Bresson, Robert Doisneau, Brassaï, Robert Capa and Dorothea Lange.
The exhibition is a manifesto for peace and the fundamental equality of human beings, crafted through humanistic post-war photography. It was presented for the very first time in 1955 and, after touring the globe,was permanently housed inClervaux Castle.
Intangible heritage - Through six Luxembourg traditions
Following the inclusion of one new tradition at the end of 2024, the Grand Duchy now has a total of six intangible universal heritage inscriptions on the UNESCO list:
Biosphere reserve - Minett UNESCO Biosphere
TheMinettregion, located in the south of Luxembourg, is a densely populated area with an extensive history of iron mining and steelmaking.Featuring Luxembourg's largest nature reserves, the region is now working to diversify its economy, reconvert certain parts of its industrial heritage and protect its natural environment.
By becoming a member of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere programme's world network of biosphere reserves in 2020, the region has becomea model for sustainable development, and visitors can enjoy the rich biodiversity of the rehabilitated land. Varioustouristandculturalevents are available to help visitors explore theMinett UNESCO Biosphere.
Minett Unesco Biosphere (Video/Audio YouTube)
Mëllerdall UNESCO Global Geopark (Video/Audio YouTube)
UNESCO World Geopark –Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall
Did you know, over 200 million years ago, there was a sea in theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallregion? The sandstones that formed the seabed still reveal many traces of that era and provide a unique insight into the history of the region. At present,the orography of the park plays a vital role in the supply of drinking water, the presence of certain animal and plant species, and land use.
In this historically remarkable setting, the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall joined the network of global geoparks in 2022. This network includes thesites of international geological significance managed in line with a concept of protection of nature and sustainable development.
Discover good environmental practices and green tourism in theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall.
Last update04.06.2025
For more information
Echternach Hopping Procession – a musical pilgrimage and UNESCO heritage
Luxembourg, a land of castles
Seven intangible cultural treasures of Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/relaxing/cruise-moselle-luxembourg.html
Cruises on the Moselle river
The Moselle region in Luxembourg has been a very popular excursion and holiday destination for many decades. Incredible landscapes, picturesque villages, award-winning wines and gastronomic treats provide a varied offer for active holidaymakers, gourmets and explorers. The passenger ships sailing on the Moselle also offer you all this. Once on board, you can not only travel comfortably from one port to the next, but also enjoy the unique scenery slowly passing you by while you relax on board.
Discover Luxembourg from the river
The Moselle flows for 37.3 km between Luxembourg and Germany againstthe picturesque backdrop of alternating vineyards and villages.The two Luxembourg-based operators, Navitours andEntente Moselle, offer several round trips, river lock cruises and day cruises, which call at the various ports as per the timetable.Three ships sail the Moselle for Navitours,theRiverdiva,Roude LéiwandMuselschëff, whileEntenteoperates theMSMarie-Astrid, probably the region’s best-known passenger ship.TheMarie-Astrid, as she is called in Luxembourg, has been sailing river cruises on the Moselle since 1966; the current, ultra-modern ship is the fifth generation.
The MSMarie-Astridand the Schengen Treaties
On 14 June 1985, theSchengen Agreementwas signed by five EU Member States on board the second MSMarie-Astrid. From 1992 to 2021, it sailed on the Danube as MS Regensburg. In 2021, Luxembourg acquired the boat and converted it into an exhibition space and built a new quay in Schengen. The boat is kept riverworthy and docked in Schengen near the European Museum.
The boats call at the various piers at fixed times, so you can easily get on or off wherever you like.
Both shipping companies allow you tonot only discover the Moselle from the river, but also take time to succumb to the charm of the villages and towns you discoveralong the way. You can easily combine hiking with a relaxing river cruise and, after a tour through the hilly landscape and its natural treasures, end the day comfortably on deck with a glass of Crémant, the sparkling wine from the region.
Places likeWormeldange, Bech-Kleinmacher, Remich and Grevenmacher are not only worth a visit because of the many winegrowers there, but are also the starting point for thesurrounding hiking and cycling trails, inviting you to stroll along the esplanade.Schengen stands out here with itsfamous European Museum. The name alone is synonymous with an open Europe, and where else but in the border triangle of Germany, France and Luxembourg is the lack of borders more tangible.
Indulge with all your senses
You can of course also spend a whole day on board and discover other views.Day trips to Trier, Bernkastel and Saarburg in Germany, as well as toThionvillein France give you a closer look at these cities and their highlights, allowing you to explore an entire region in the most relaxed of ways.
Above all, quality is emphasised on board.Not only are the ships state-of-the-art, but also theservice and culinary specialities that await you on board meet the highest standards. Whether it’s a small snack or à la carte, no wishes are left unfulfilled.
For larger events, such as weddings or company parties, it is even possible to rent aboat all for yourselves.
Other activities
Curious to find out more?
Luxembourg’s largest waterway is alsowell-known for its numerous activities around the Moselle.
Active holidaymakers can do some daring wakeboarding, or take a time-out while canoeing or fishing. For nature lovers, avisit to theHaff RéimechBiodiversum, a nature reserveof a special kind, is also recommended.
Are you more the relaxed type? Thentake time for yourself at thethermal baths inMondorf-les-Bainsor enjoy the sun at the quarry ponds in Remerschen.
No matter what your preferences are, whether you arrive as a day tourist or want to stay longer,the region is bound to enchant you.
Last update11.03.2026
For more information
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Nature for all: comfort hiking trails
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/relaxing/rural-accomodation-relax-countryside.html
Rural accommodation: relax in the heart of the countryside
Do you want to experience the joys of nature from dawn to dusk? With more than 5,000 km of hiking trails, numerous castles nestled at the edge of the woods and a growing network of bicycle paths, Luxembourg is an ideal destination to delight in nature during the day and, increasingly, at night. Traditional rural accommodation in Luxembourg is evolving! Visitors can now benefit from a wide range of options such as glamping cabins, attractive parking areas for motorhomes as well as extraordinary and unique accommodation. There are endless opportunities to help you relax and keep you in touch with nature!
Glamping, where camping meets glamour!
The services offered by the camping sites have evolved considerably over the past few years. We often associate traditional camping with basic, rustic-style accommodation that is close to nature. However, you can now enjoy naturein complete comfortor, if you prefer, incharmingandluxuryaccommodation. In fact, the term "glamping" is a portmanteau of "glamorous" and "camping".
For the past few years, camping sites in the Grand Duchy have added to their traditional service range. It's not just a green space to pitch your tent or park your motorhome, you can also enjoy lovely cabins. These small wooden huts have been transformed into glamorous lodges and cabins that cater to people looking for absolute comfort and within touching distance of the green spaces that they explored during the day.
Unfortunately, we don't have the time or space to showcase all the camping sites in Luxembourg but here is a short selection of some of our favourites:
Would you like to explore all the camp sites and glamping options in Luxembourg? Please visit thevisitluxembourg.luwebsite.
Without a doubt, the glamping market will continue togrowin Luxembourg. In fact, the country is investing in the development of a network ofinnovative tourist accommodation in rural areas.Glamping cabinswill also be made available in various settings, such ascastlesandpublic parks.
Motorhomes - spoilt for choice!
You can enjoy a good night's sleep, just like at home, in the great outdoors and explore to your heart's content. This refreshing experience is appealing to an ever-increasing number of people who are eager to enjoy their holidays in motorhomes or caravans without compromising on comfort.
Would you like to experience a holiday in a caravan for the first time? In Luxembourg, you canrentyour mobile home from several service providers:
In Luxembourg, you canpark your caravanon acampsite, and take advantage of additional services such as laundry facilities or swimming pools or you can parkin an area outside the campsite free of charge, if you're only planning a short stopover. Often located in a natural and lush environment, these areas are easily accessible via main roads. Check all of the available options on thevisitluxembourg.luwebsite.
Luxembourg, 'Destination Camper Park(ing)'
Luxembourg is investing in the creation of anational network of campervan parksthat goes beyond the classic concept of a parking area. The aim is to meet the new expectations of motorhome travellers who do not wish to forego top-of-the-range services during their short stays (2 to 3 days). The project foresees locations close to tourist sites, on the edge of villages in rural areas or within green spaces. The approach is no longer that of a parking area, but of a pleasant place to stay, with convivial common areas, generously sized pitches and facilities that leave plenty of room for nature. Peace, privacy and security will also be guaranteed.
Exceptional accommodation for unique adventures
Would you like to try a truly magical experience? How about sleeping amongst the birds in thetree canopy! AtBamhaiser Gaalgebierg, located in themunicipal animal parkin Esch-sur-Alzette, you can sleep in huts on stilts camouflaged in oak trees, chestnuts, birches and maples. Three different themed cottages await you:
All of the cottages have showers and toilets as well as a furnished private terrace. There's no need to worry about your "tenants" as Maisy, Mia Morilla and Dr Dachs are imaginary characters, drawn by the local illustratorOlga Reiff, to entertain younger guests!
Or perhaps you'd like to sleep in a "mushroom" next to the river? InUseldange, in the Guttland region, thePéitche Lauerhas threeMushRoomson stilts. These original accommodation are unique and perfect for cycling trips: in fact, the Péitche Lauer has been awarded theBed & Bikelabel, which guarantees the availability of a free bike storage facility that is locked at night, the option to dry your clothes and equipment, a breakfast that is rich in vitamins and carbohydrates as well as other services. If you prefer to eat a traditional meal, there's no need to travel further afield: therestaurantof the Péitche Lauer offers local specialties in a relaxed setting.
Since 1824, a small stream of water turns the wheels of the Racké mill inEnscherange(Luxembourg Ardennes/Éislek). TheRackésmillenis the oldest water mill in Luxembourg. It was built in 1334, although the current building dates from 1824. In 2003, the formermiller's housewas renovated and transformed intoa holiday cottagewith four bedrooms, a living room with sofa beds, a kitchen, two showers, three toilets and a small terrace. TheRackésmillenis part of theRobbesscheier Tourist Centre, which also hasrooms available in an old farmSammeshaffand offersmealscreated with ingredients grown by local producers.
In the Moselle region, you can enjoy a unique holiday experience in arestored medieval towerin the heart of the old town ofGrevenmacher. The apartment can accommodate up to four people. The rooms, some of which are semi-circular, are located on three separate floors. This is a truly original location; it's ideal as a base to explore thewine growing regioncultivated by the Celts, the Gauls and the Romans, who grew vines in the area during their reign!
Last update06.03.2026
For more information
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Hiking (II): Éislek, Guttland and Minett
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/relaxing/wellness.html
Wellness: magical moments of well-being and relaxation
Do you need some time to unwind after a working day? Are you looking for a way to rebalance your body and mind? Luxembourg has a wide range of wellness centres offering spa care, sensational relaxation and rejuvenating massages. Based on your expectations, take your pick from this small selection of local oases.
Mondorf-les-Bains and its thermal spa
The story of the Domaine thermal deMondorf-les-Bainsis fascinating. In the 19th century, boreholes were drilled into the subsoil, in an attempt to find rock salt in Luxembourg as a result of the significant rise in the price of salt across Europe. They never found any salt, but what they did find was a large body of thermal mineral water. As the first two sources are now almost depleted, the Michel Lucius Source is the one from which you get thebenefits of spa waterwhen you visit theDomaine thermal Mondorf. Today, it is theone and only thermal spring in Luxembourg.
The Domaine offers you the chance to relax in its thermal pool, eleven different saunas, several hammams, jacuzzis and swimming pools. In addition, you can enjoy overnight stays and medical cures. It is also home to a fitness centre, two hotels and three restaurants.
After you have finished reinvigorating your body and mind, why not (re)discover theMoselleregion?
Wellness across the country
If you live in or near the capital, thePidal Spais the ideal option for a relaxing break. With a sauna area and outdoor pool, this green oasis inWalferdange,provides exclusive beauty treatments and massages. You can also combine spa treatments with sport at the fitness centre or in the pool. Would you like to relax in complete tranquility? Are looking for a more personalised service? Discover the private spa suites for a tailor-made experience, whether alone, as a couple or with friends.
TheCoque Wellness Centrein Kirchbergoffers traditional relaxation facilities, such as different temperature saunas, hammam and whirlpool. It also has a snow cabin at -14°C allowing you to immerse yourself in the sauna rituals of Scandinavia!
Les Thermeslies in the vicinity of Luxembourg City. This recreational water park with saunas and a wellness area is located inStrassen.
InMersch,theKrounebierg aquatic centrehas a modern wellness area equipped with various saunas, an infrared cabin, a steam room and a cold pool as well as several whirlpools and 360° adventure showers.
In the North of the country inHosingen, you can also chill out in theAquanat'Our. It features a water park, a fitness centre and a sauna area with a steam bath, 60° sanarium, a cold pool and three types of saunas.
TheLand of the Red Rocksalso offers unique locations to unwind and relax. InDifferdange,Aquasudfeatures a wellness area with five saunas, a steam bath, a cold bath and a whirlpool. To enjoy the benefits of water while immersed in nature, theEscher Schwemm–Les bains du parcwater park, a ten-minute walk fromEsch-sur-Alzetteoffers, among others delights, a sauna area with a Turkish bath and a Finnish sauna.
Good to know: the saunas in most of Luxembourg's wellness centres are a "ladies only" one day per week!
Last update04.06.2025
For more information
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/relaxing/slow-tourism.html
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Do you fancy a week brimming with relaxing walks amidst unspoilt landscapes to recharge your batteries after a long year of work? Need to unwind after a meeting? Luxembourg is known to be a vibrant country, but also an ideal destination for slow tourism. Amazing castles, unspoilt nature, city parks and regional products made according to traditional methods await you across the whole country. It's a perfect opportunity to take care of yourself, but also to meet new friends in an environment that is prone to long conversations and cultural exchange.
Everyday slow tourism
Everyday worries sometimes make it hard for us to see the strengths of our closest environment. Yet places such asLuxembourg City'sparksare just what you need to enjoy some peace and quiet in the middle of a busy work day.
For example,summeris the perfect season for picnics in theVilla Vauban's park. It features a small beach with activities to doby yourself or with your family. Take part in ayoga classor let yourself go with theKlassik am Parkclassical musicopen-air concerts.
Are you anartlover? So have your lunchbreak atTony Neuman Parkin Limperstberg to enjoy a walk amidst sculptures. Are you keen onroses? Then you will loveMerl Park's rose garden, known as Rousegäertchen in Luxembourgish, featuring a smalllakewith miniaturesailing boats. Track them with your eyes and enjoy a peaceful moment...
After your day at work, you can alsorecharge your batteriesat the gateway to Luxembourg City. You could take a bus of thepublic transport networkto go to theBambëschor Gréngewald. This way, you could free yourself from the stress of driving your car and you could be mentally ready for your quiet stroll in these woods that represent Luxembourg's largest wooded area. Take one of the markedpathsand breathe in and out deeply to feel good for work on the next day.
You can also finish your day in utter peace thanks to various wellness centres and spa waters. No need to go far to slow down in your everyday life!
Guttland - a perfect region to slow down
Even though theGuttlandregion represents the heart of Luxembourg, it isan oasis of peace and quiet. At the gateway of the capital, hundreds of kilometres offootpathsandcycle trackscriss-cross pristine landscapes, encouraginggreen mobility. Examples of the region's historical heritage are everywhere, whether in the Valley of the Seven Castles, at the many Gallo-Roman sites or in the fascinating rural museums.
Want to take arelaxing tripback in time? Then take a trip through theValley of the Seven Castles. You can also take advantage of theBed+Bikeinitiative and travel the region knowing that a lovely place to stay awaits you and your bike, at the end of the day!
Are you looking for a getaway that goes hand in hand with yourenvironmental conscienceand your support in preservingbiodiversityandregional produce? Come and visit the many innovative and sustainable regional projects! TheThillenvogtei rural museumoffers a glimpse of what it was like to live and work in the countryside in past centuries. TheBeckerich water milloffers guided tours about renewable energy sources and sustainable development.
Easily accessible from Luxembourg Citybypublic transport, the multi-faceted Guttland region will delight anyone who is looking for slow tourism.
Slow food, a movement that is also here in Luxembourg
Theslow foodphilosophy is the backbone of slow tourism. Themovementfound its roots in Italy in the 1980s and establishes a clear link between pleasure, the origin of food and rural life. Nowadays, it is an international movement promoting the respect of lifestyles in harmony with nature.
This approach also exists in Luxembourg. In fact, theSlow Food Luxembourgassociation was founded in 1999 with the aim of promoting the philosophy and objectives of the international movement in Luxembourg and the Greater Region. It offers a wide range ofactivities: tasting workshops, cookery lessons and visits of producers, etc.
Allow yourself to take the time to enjoy thebenefits of slow foodmade withLuxembourgish produce. And why not pair them with ourwines and crémants? The dolce vita is waiting for you everywhere in Luxembourg!
Last update03.10.2024
For more information
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
Wellness: magical moments of well-being and relaxation
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/relaxing/parks-and-gardens.html
Parks and gardens: nature in everyday life
Nature is just a stone's throw away in Luxembourg! Whether you are in the city centre, North, South, East or West of the Grand Duchy, there is always a park or a garden to escape reality and forget the stress of everyday life.
Green areas in the heart of the city centre
Luxembourg City is a perfect blend of business and relaxation. Over one quarter of the capital is made up of green areas. Just like Central Park in New York, the Petrusse Valley is the green lung or breather of Luxembourg: featuring green parks, it offers beautiful walks and peace and quiet in the heart of the city centre!
Take part in one of the various events that are held in the valley throughout the year. The most famous ones are theDKV Urban Trailand celebrations on the eve of National Day for children and adults alike.
Luxembourg Cityfeatures other parks as well. The Edouard André Municipal Park is a haven of greenery with green areas such as theKinnékswissthat are perfect to unwind. Merl-Belair Park, just a stone's throw away from the city centre, is without any doubt a favourite meeting place for families. Children can expend their energy at a wonderful playground while parents recharge their batteries in the meadows on the edges of the small lake or ponds.
All the municipal parks of the capital can be accessed on foot or by bicycle, and invite you to slow down and enjoy a quiet moment in our hectic world.
Discover the Grand Duchy's wonderful gardens
Garden lovers, listen up! Come and visit theKlouschtergaartat the foot of the Bock rock. This garden will help you discover the rare crops of our regions. Their conservation is one of the main aims of the garden, which enjoys a very special micro-climate.
Outside Luxembourg City, you can admire botanical collections, exotic plants and many kinds of fruit-bearing trees in the French Gardens ofAnsembourg Castle. A visit of thejardin d'art(art garden) in Wiltz is also certainly worth your while. What's more a wide range of gardens await you all over Luxembourg!
Last update03.10.2024
For more information
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Wellness: magical moments of well-being and relaxation
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery/nature-unesco.html
Discovering UNESCO's natural heritage in Luxembourg
UNESCO heritage is also about nature. In fact, UNESCO's "Man and the Biosphere" and "UNESCO Global Geoparks" programmes focus on natural resources and the relationship between people and their environment. In Luxembourg, two areas have been awarded this quality label: the Minett Unesco Biosphere, which joined the network of biosphere reserves in 2020, and theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall, which is part of the UNESCO Global Geoparks Network since 2022.
Minett Unesco Biosphere – Biosphere reserve
TheMinettregion, also called the Land of the Red Rocks, is located in the south of Luxembourg. It is a densely populated area with a long history characterised by iron mining and the steel industry. It is home to the largest natural reserves in the country. More recently, the region has been able to diversify its economy, reconvert parts of its industrial heritage and protect its natural environment.
In October 2020,Minett Unesco Biospherewas officially integrated into the World Network of Biosphere Reserves of the UNESCO "Man and the Biosphere" programme. In order to be internationally recognised as a biosphere reserve, the area must demonstrate the impact of specific factors linked to human activity on nature. This is the case for this particular region, which has been strongly affected by industrial activity from the late 19th century until the 1990s: the extraction and processing of iron ore, the iron and steel wastelands as well as the mines have left their mark on the landscape. The role ofimmigration, notably the influx of Italians, also proved decisive in the development of the region.
This natural area has become alearning ground for sustainable development, rich in biodiversity and a site of historical significance, which has benefited from a major urban renewal. With a surface area of200km2, the area is home to about one-third of the population of Luxembourg and 150 nationalities. The region hasprotected areas of natural beautyand more than600 hectares of industrial wasteland undergoing regeneration. It is a genuine gift for lovers of nature and industrial history.
What is the best way to explore this extraordinary biosphere?
Firstly,we recommend that you explore the region by taking ahikethrough the 11 municipalities that are part of the biosphere: Bettembourg, Differdange, Dudelange, Esch-sur-Alzette, Käerjeng, Kayl, Mondercange, Pétange, Rumelange, Sanem and Schifflange. The landscape is characterised by "cuestas" which are unobstructed asymmetrical landforms. They include various natural habitats and numerous ecosystems such as orchards, limestone grasslands, alluvial or ravine forests, wet meadows, all of which are home to a diverse range of fauna and flora.
The star trail is undoubtedly theMinett Trail, designed specifically for the UNESCO application. Its 90km are spread over 10 stages, and you can also stay in one of the 11 unique lodges located along the way.
The Minett Unesco Biosphereagendaalso features a wide range of activities. Get involved!
The "Man and the Biosphere" programme predicts the consequences of today's actions on tomorrow's world and thereby increases people's ability to efficiently manage natural resources for the well-being of both human populations and the environment. UNESCO.
Minett Unesco Biosphere (Video/Audio YouTube)
Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall- UNESCO Global Geopark
Did you know, over 200 million years ago, there was a sea in theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallregion? The sandstones that formed the seabed still reveal many traces of that era and provide a unique insight into the history of the region. At present,the orography of the park plays a vital role in the supply of drinking water, the presence of certain animal and plant species, and land use.
With this remarkable history, theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallofficially became part of the UNESCO Global Geopark network in April 2022. A UNESCO Global Geopark is an area with a geological heritage of international importance. Many of the geoparks in the UNESCO network help to raise awareness of geological hazards such as volcanic risks, earthquakes and tsunamis, and as part of this, develop hazard mitigation strategies within local communities. UNESCO Global Geoparks keep records of climate change in recent years.They act as educators for the changes that are taking place and help to adopt good environmental practices by promoting the use of renewable energy and green tourism.
What is the ideal way to explore the nature park?
Without a doubt,hiking is the best way to discover the park.Route 2 of the Mullerthal Trailtakes you past one of the most amazing geosites of the park: theWollefsschlucht(wolf gorge) a breathtaking 40m deep gorge. Moreover, the trails often pass through villages that offer local specialties, such asBerdorf cheese, a culinary delight which showcases the relationship between the inhabitants of the region and their environment.
The park also offers awide range ofevents, which combine exploration with learning: these include nature trails for children, drinking water discovery hikes, bird walks, herb workshops, activities with bees and many more!
Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall (Video/Audio YouTube)
One of the major attractions of the park is the large number of fruit trees: apples, prunes, pears, Mirabelle plums and cherries. The close ties between people and the environment is evident in this region and we highly recommend that you sample the local products; you won't regret it!
Last update11.03.2026
For more information
Top 5: long trails in Luxembourg
Nature reserves: Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall - a geological masterpiece
Nature and discovery
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery/nature-reserve-upper-sure.html
Nature reserves: Naturpark Öewersauer, Luxembourg's lake district
Naturpark Öewersauer, also known as the Upper Sûre Nature Park, is in the north-western part of theÉislekregion, in the Luxembourg Ardennes. This 200km2 nature area on the border with Belgium was established in 2005. Approximately 15,500 residents live in the five municipalities associated with the park, which work together to protect nature whilst fostering economic development in the region.Naturpark Öewersaueris the perfect destination if you are looking for beautiful landscapes, as well as water-based sports and leisure activities!
Naturpark Öewersauer, a vast open water area
At the centre ofNaturpark Öewersaueris the Upper Sûre Lake, Luxembourg's largest drinking water reservoir, which provides drinking water for around 70% of the country's population. The lake is also the ideal setting for sports and sustainable leisure activities – but it is not the only feature that creates the region's characteristic waterscapes. Water is everywhere: the river Sûre and its many tributaries cross the region, creating a haven for wildlife and also for anyone seeking a peaceful place to relax and unwind.
Naturpark Öewersauer (Video/Audio YouTube)
The park is named after the Sûre and the Upper Sûre Lake.
The Sûre is a tributary of the Moselle. It is 206km long, with 136km flowing through Luxembourg. The source of the river is in the Belgian village of Vaux-lez-Rosières. It enters Luxembourg at Rombach, crosses the north of the country and flows into the Moselle at Wasserbillig.
At the Esch-sur-Sûre dam, it forms the Upper Sûre Lake, created in 1961 around 1km west of Esch-sur-Sûre. The lake measures 308 hectares and provides drinking water and electricity for the region, while also regulating the water level of the Sûre.
What is a nature reserve?
A nature reserve is an area of at least 5,000 hectares incorporating a natural and cultural heritage of great significance. The creation, planning and management must pave the way for the conservation, restoration and promotion of the natural and cultural heritage. The aim is also to provide local residents with opportunities for sustainable economic and socio-cultural development that respects this heritage.
Naturpark Öewersauercurrently has five member municipalities: Boulaide, Esch-sur-Sûre, Lac de la Haute-Sûre, Wiltz and Winseler. Since January 2020, the park has been working closely with Goesdorf with a view to it becoming a member municipality in future. In cooperation with the State, the municipalities form theSyndicat pour l'aménagement et la gestion du Parc naturel de la Haute-Sûre, which manages the conservation and development of the park. This involves various nature conservation projects and initiatives in the fields of agriculture, energy, culture, tourism and environmental education – all of which provide a wide range of opportunities to explore the park.
How to exploreNaturpark Öewersauer
Explore the natural environment
The park's main attraction is the lake, where you can try your hand at a variety of water sportsand also relax in one of the areas where swimming is permitted:
Swimming season in Luxembourg generally runs from 1st May to 30th September, and water sports (as well as swimming) are often only possible during this period. Since the lake is Luxembourg's main drinking water reservoir,a number of regulations and restrictions must be observed!
Explore what nature has to offer with theVum Séirange
For many years, farmers and producers in the member municipalities have been committed to using innovative, sustainable methods that respect the park's natural resources such as water and energy. This philosophy has given rise to theVum Séibrand (literally "from the lake"), which includes a range of products:
Téi vum Séi (Video/Audio YouTube)
Gëback vum Séi (Video/Audio YouTube)
Duch vum Séi (Video/Audio YouTube)
If you prefer to keep your feet on dry land, theNaturpark Öewersaueralso offers a host of other nature-related activities. Here is a small selection:
Explore the national heritage
The Ardennes region has an eventful history. The Second World War was one of Luxembourg's darkest chapters, and in the final months of the war, the Battle of the Bulge devastated the north of the country, leaving traces that are still visible today.
TheSchumannseckRemembrance Trailleads you in the footsteps of a decisive encounter during the Battle of the Bulge. The full circuit is 2.8km long and should take around two hours. Dotted along the route are human-sized silhouettes created from photos dating from the time of the battle. The trail takes walkers past visible remains and reconstructed shelters. Twenty themed points along the route provide additional information and QR codes to access testimonies and new historical insights.
The fascinating history of the cross-border region that is home toNaturpark Öewersauercan also be explored in the exhibition "Our Common Heritage" in Boulaide, which looks back at the lives of local populations from the Belle Époque to the early days of European integration. It features five exhibition modules and an immersive experience.
Would you like to explore other nature reserves? Check outthe portal of Luxembourg's nature reserves, where you will find a wide range ofpublicationsto help you plan your trips.
Last update27.02.2026
For more information
Nature reserves: Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall - a geological masterpiece
Nature reserves: German-Luxembourg Nature Park – Nature without borders
Nature reserves: Naturpark Our and the diverse landscape of the Luxembourg Ardennes
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery/nature-reserve-our.html
Nature reserves: Naturpark Our and the diverse landscape of the Luxembourg Ardennes
TheNaturpark Our, also known as the Our nature reserve, is located in the north of the Éislek, at the heart of Luxembourg's Ardennes region. Created in 2005, it covers a surface area of 420km2 and borders Belgium and Germany. Approximately 24,000 inhabitants live in the eight municipalities, which work together to protect nature whilst fostering economic development in the region. If you're looking for a diverse landscape, it's the ideal destination!
The ever-changing scenery of theNaturpark Our
TheNaturpark Ouris characterised by vast plateaus and narrow valleys carved into the rock by the Our and Clerve riversand their tributaries. Unique biotopes which form vital habitats for a wide range of plant and bird species have been preserved in the marshes on the high plateau and in isolated areas of the river valleys.
Naturpark Our (Video/Audio YouTube)
The Our, the river which lends its name to the reserve
The river originates in the eastern Hautes Fagnes region at an altitude of 653m, in a place called Eichelsberg near Manderfeld (Belgium). It then flows south, roughly marking the border between Belgium and Germany as far as the village of Ouren (Belgium). Thus, it serves as a natural border between the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and Germany, with condominium status. Shortly before Vianden, the left bank delineates a Luxembourgish enclave that includes a large part of Vianden. Downstream, it acts as the natural border and continues its course to Wallendorf (Germany), where it flows into the Sûre, after covering a total distance of 78km.
What is a nature reserve?
A nature reserve is an area of at least 5,000 hectares incorporating a natural and cultural heritage of great significance. The creation, planning and management must pave the way for the conservation, restoration and promotion of the natural and cultural heritage. Moreover, its objective is to provide the reserves's inhabitants with opportunities for sustainable economic and socio-cultural development that respects this national heritage.
What is a biotope?
A biotope is an environment where plants or animals live. Animals can use the biotope in order to feed, reproduce, shelter or rest. Above all, the environment is characterised by the physical conditions of the landscape (nature and water regime of the soil, exposure, micro-climate, relief, etc.). Therefore, land on a south-facing slope or land creating a depression where water can rest will create a biotope for plants that thrive in these types of conditions. The vegetation that covers a plot of land can itself provide a habitat for other plants and animals. For example, a bed of reeds or a hedge can form a living habitat for other plants and animals.
Would you like to find out more about Luxembourg's biotopes? Check the land registry of biotopes for open environments and woodland on the environment portal,emwelt.lu.
At present, theNaturpark Ourcomprises eight municipalities: Clervaux, Kiischpelt, Parc Hosingen, Putscheid, Tandel, Troisvierges, Vianden and Wincrange. Since September 2021, the park has been working closely with the municipality of Weiswampach in order to bring it on board. In cooperation with the State, these municipalities form the Syndicat pour l'aménagement et la gestion du Parc naturel de l'Our, which manages the conservation and development of the park. These activities are carried out via various nature conservation projects in the fields of agriculture, culture, tourism and environmental education. They provide a wide range of opportunities to explore the park!
How to explore theNaturpark Our
Explore the natural environment
A large number of national and international walking and hiking trails await you, and also include themed trails. Here is a small selection:
Cycling and mountain bike enthusiasts can also explore the reserve: In addition to the national cycle routes, the nature reserve has two cycle routes and six mountain bike trails with varying degrees of difficulty. Furthermore,E-bike t'Our "Looss d'Kierch am Duerf" circuitshave been specially designed to cater for electric bikes. They cover a distance of 28km, linking Troisvierges and Weiswampach.
School of taste (Video/Audio YouTube)
Discover the joys of nature by savouring regional products
We eat every day, but where does our food come from? What is the relationship between the food we eat and the environment, the climate and regional development? And what about flavour? TheSchool of Flavouranswers these questions via interactive teachings units and workshops.
For its part, theNatur genéissen – Mir iessen regional, bio a fairprogramme showcasesregional productsby fostering agricultural practices that are in harmony with nature.
Discover national heritage
Many breathtaking castles illuminate the landscape of theNaturpark Our:
In Vianden, you can also visit theHouse of Victor Hugo, a literary museum dedicated to the French writerwho stayed in Luxembourg on numerous occasions.
However, if you'reinterested in geology, we highly recommend a visit to theCopper mine museumin Stolzembourg.
Would you like to explore other nature reserves? Check out theportal of Luxembourg's nature reserves, where you will find a wide range ofpublicationsto help you to plan your journey.
Would you like to explore other nature reserves? Check out theportal of Luxembourg's nature reserves, where you will find a wide range ofpublicationsto help you to plan your journey.
Last update27.02.2026
For more information
Nature reserves: Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall - a geological masterpiece
Nature reserves: German-Luxembourg Nature Park – Nature without borders
Nature reserves: Naturpark Öewersauer, Luxembourg's lake district
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery/nature-reserve-mellerdall.html
Nature reserves: Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall - a geological masterpiece
TheNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallis located in the central and eastern part of the country, in the Mullerthal region, also known as Luxembourg's Little Switzerland. Created in 2016, it covers an area of 256km2 and forms the border with Germany. Approximately 25,800 inhabitants live in the 11 municipalities, which work together to protect nature and foster economic development in the territory. Without a doubt, it’s the perfect destination if you're looking for mesmerising geological landscapes and breath-taking scenery. It's hardly surprising that theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallhas been part of the UNESCO Global Geoparks Network since 2022!
Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall, a geological masterpiece with UNESCO status
TheNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallis characterised by its broad diversity of scenery, with deep valleys and rolling hills and above all by its sandstone and dolomite rocks.This green and lush landscape includes the valleys of the Ernz Noire, Ernz Blanche and Basse-Sûre.
The genesis of the Mëllerdall Region (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg sandstone
The Luxembourg sandstone rock formationsof the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall are amongst the most spectacular in western Europe. When the different layers of rock were formed over 200 million years ago, this region was below sea level. The sea has long since disappeared and has been replaced by rivers that have sculpted the park's distinctive rocky landscape. Still today, the park's fascinating scenery offers a deep insight into its history. Luxembourg sandstone also plays a major role in the region, such as supplying drinking water.
What is a nature reserve?
A nature reserve is an area of at least 5,000 hectares incorporating a natural and cultural heritage of great significance. Its creation, planning and management must pave the way for the conservation, restoration and promotion of the natural and cultural heritage. Moreover, its objective is to provide the reserve's inhabitants with opportunities for sustainable economic and socio-cultural development that respects this national heritage.
What is a UNESCO Global Geopark?
In April 2022, theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallofficially became part of the UNESCO network of global geoparks.A UNESCO Global Geopark is an area with significant geological heritage of international value.A large number of geoparks in the UNESCO network are helping to raise awareness of geological risks such as volcanic activity, earthquakes and tsunamis, and are developing strategies to mitigate these dangers within local communities. Moreover, UNESCO global geoparks keep records of climate change in recent years. They serve as educators on current climate change as well as adopting best environmental practices to utilising renewable energy and employing the best standards of green tourism.
Currently, theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallis composed of 11 member municipalities: Beaufort, Bech, Berdorf, Consdorf, Echternach, Fischbach, Heffingen, Larochette, Nommern, Rosport-Mompach and Waldbillig. Since September 2021, the park has been working closely with the municipality of Reisdorf in order to bring it on board.In cooperation with the State, these municipalities form the Syndicat pour l'aménagement et la gestion du parc, which manages the conservation and development of the park. These activities are carried out via various nature conservation projects in the fields of agriculture, culture, tourism and environmental education. They provide a wide range of opportunities to explore the park!
How to explore theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall
Explore the natural environment
Without a doubt, hiking is the best way to uncover the beauty of theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall:
The Mullerthal Trail has been awarded the Leading Quality Trails - Best of Europe label by the European Hiking Federation.
Another interesting alternative is to explore the Mullerthal by bike:
Discover national heritage
Many magnificent castles rise above the landscape in the various municipalities in the nature reserve:
Nestled in the town of Echternach, the capital of the region, are two amazing architectural treats:
If you are a science enthusiast, you must visit theTudor Museumin Rosport-Mompach. Part science centre and part traditional museum, it's the perfect location to delve into the life of Henri Tudor - an internationally renowned Luxembourgish inventor - and his discoveries.
Would you like to explore other nature reserves? Check out theportal of Luxembourg's nature reserves, where you will find a wide range ofpublicationsto help you to plan your journey.
Last update27.02.2026
For more information
Nature reserves: German-Luxembourg Nature Park – Nature without borders
Nature reserves: Naturpark Öewersauer, Luxembourg's lake district
Nature reserves: Naturpark Our and the diverse landscape of the Luxembourg Ardennes
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery/german-luxembourg-nature-park.html
Nature reserves: German-Luxembourg Nature Park – Nature without borders
The German-Luxembourg Nature Park stretches across north-eastern Luxembourg and the eastern part of Rhineland-Palatinate in Germany, on either side of the Our and Sûre rivers. In Luxembourg, it partly covers the Mullerthal andÉislekregions. The park, which has a total surface area of around 800km2, was created in 1964 as Europe's first cross-border nature park. It is the perfect destination for anyone who likes Premium quality hikes in protected natural surroundings.
German-Luxembourg Nature Park – four parks combined
The German-Luxembourg Nature Park, which stretches over around 800km2, links several nature areas in Luxembourg and Rhineland-Palatinate in Germany.It covers four nature parks located within a relatively small area: theNaturpark OurandNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdallin Luxembourg, andthe North Eifel Nature Park and South Eifel Nature Parkin Germany.
A treaty that anticipated free movement
In 1964, Luxembourg and Rhineland-Palatinate signed a treaty to protect, tend and develop the landscapes on the banks of the Sûre and the Our by applying the same principles and approach. This established the first cross-border nature park in Western Europe. The treaty stipulates that the area covered by woodland cannot be reduced and that the governments must facilitate access for pedestrians wanting to explore the region beyond their national border. For in the early 1960s, although the European Economic Community had just been established with the 1957 Rome Treaties, the Schengen Agreements were still a distant prospect (they would be signed in 1985 and 1990). Visitors and residents needed to be able to cross the border without difficulty, and that was made possible by this pioneering treaty.
European Diploma for Protected Areas (Video/Audio YouTube)
European Diploma for Protected Areas
In 1973, the German-Luxembourg Nature Park was awarded the European Diploma for Protected Areas by the Council of Europe. This international award is granted to natural and semi-natural areas and landscapes of exceptional European importance for the preservation of biological, geological and landscape diversity and which are managed in an exemplary way. In 2020, the diploma was renewed until 2028.
How to explore the German-Luxembourg Nature Park
Explore the natural environment
The best way to explore the cross-border park is by walking and hiking, especially in the South Eifel region and in Luxembourg. A total of24 Premium quality circuitshave been developed in recent years as part of the "NaturWanderPark delux" initiative. They include easy, moderate and difficult routes. Here is a selection:
Hiking in the NaturWanderPark delux (Eifel) (Video/Audio YouTube)
What is a Premium trail?
Premium hiking trails are routes and circuits that are clearly waymarked and provide an outstanding hiking experience. Walkers can be sure that they are in for a treat with these carefully designed trails, which offer pleasant walking surfaces, stunning views, forest landscapes, rivers, rock formations, well-tended rest and relaxation areas, and cultural and historical heritage. The Premium label is awarded by theGerman Hiking Institute.
Although the park has been German-Luxembourgish since its early days, it is actually at the intersection of three countries: Luxembourg, Germany and Belgium. So there are also paths and routes that link up with theHigh Fens – Eifel Nature Parkin Belgium.
Explore the heritage
Germany's Eifel region has always been home to a variety of cultures and peoples, and the area still bears traces of their heritage, with castles, fortresses, cloisters and churchesall telling the story of power struggles over the centuries. Here is a selection:
For more information about heritage on the Luxembourg side, see our articles about theNaturpark OurandNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall. You will find all the tips and addresses you need to cultivate all your senses during your stay.
Last update02.03.2026
For more information
Nature reserves: Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall - a geological masterpiece
Nature reserves: Naturpark Öewersauer, Luxembourg's lake district
Nature reserves: Naturpark Our and the diverse landscape of the Luxembourg Ardennes
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/social-responsible-restaurant-luxembourg-inclusion.html
Socially responsible restaurants: fostering cultural exchanges, social cohesion and gastronomy for the greater good
It is possible to enjoy a healthy diet, discover a world of flavours from different regions of the globe and eat in an environmentally responsible way while promoting inclusion. Several associations and cooperatives have opened restaurants in the Grand Duchy. Moreover, immigrants and people with refugee status in Luxembourg have also set up their own catering business. If you're searching for a way to get socially engaged while tantalising your taste buds, please check out this small selection of socially responsible restaurants.
Zopp & Z'Iessen: soup and to eat!
SIS ProActif has launched its own restaurant in Contern. It's calledZopp & Z'Iessen. One of its principles is "To cook like in the good old days".Its name, "Zopp & Z'Iessen- which literally translates as "soup & to eat", echoes the recurring reply of endless mothers of yesteryear when asked by their children: "Mamm, wat kachs de?" (Mummy, what are you cooking?). This tradition is upheld in the restaurant through itsdelicious, hearty and freshly cooked dishes prepared with regional ingredients.
The restaurant also has a social dimension. It employs people who have not always been lucky in life. These individuals are trained and reassigned to the labour market as employees ofSIS ProActif. They also work to furnish the premises and grow fruit and vegetables in their own gardens.
At present,the restaurant is open from Monday to Friday. It offers a daily menu and an "à la carte" menu with local Luxembourgish classics and a few twists on culinary favourites.You can also place orders to takeaway.
Eis Brasserie Boulodrome: a food bank and brewery
Located in Belvaux,Eis Brasserie Boulodromepromotes responsible consumption by selling regional, organic and fair-trade products, which are showcased in their cuisine with creativity, care, culinary flair. At present,the brasserie offers a daily menu from Monday to Friday, and you can also select dishes from the “à la carte” menu.
Eis Brasserie Boulodromehas been set up byEis Épicerie, a project initiated by the EcoSol Sane asbl and the cooperative and SIS EpiSol Sanem.It goes without saying that the brewery is thus closely aligned to the values of the project: environmentally friendly, social and socially responsible in the spirit of the circular economy.
After your meal, you can also do your shopping in the grocery shop, which is open to all customers. You'll find products from sheltered workshops, depending on availability. These products help people back into the workplace, in a location that promotes social diversity and cohesion.
Chiche! A genuine challenge... overcome
Social inclusion and diversity is at the heart of theChiche!restaurants, offering homemade Lebanese cuisine and authentic Middle Eastern flavours. The first temporary restaurant was born out of the desire of a few friends tocreate a social restaurant by employing people from all backgrounds who have difficultyfinding a job but have amazing skills. The project now coversfour permanent addresses: in the Bonnevoie and Limpertsberg districts of Luxembourg City, as well as in Esch-sur-Alzette and Leudelange.Chiche! ​ currently employs 55 migrants and refugees in its four restaurants.
The concept remains unchanged: the premises are decorated using second-hand objects to limit investment and maximise the social impact for all those involved.
The United Nations Refugee Agency has described the project as an inspiring model, enabling refugees to play a more active role in their new country.
A short history of the word "Chiche!"
The restaurant's website reminds us that "Chiche" has a triple meaning: it is the French word for chickpeas, one of the cornerstones of Mediterranean cuisine and the main ingredient in falafel, the restaurant's signature dish. It is also - phonetically - the Arabic word for skewer. And last but not least, Chiche! is a French expression which means "to take up a challenge" and launch a restaurant that delivers a social impact, as well as being sustainable and economically viable while employing only non-professionals from 21 different countries - a real challenge indeed... and yet a challenge that has been overcome!
Madame Witzeg: for extraordinary employees
The gastronomic restaurantMadame Witzegin Belvaux is a social project that fosters the often underestimated potential of people with Down's syndrome, better known as Trisomy 21. A significant proportion of the members of staff have this syndrome or another disability.
This inclusive restaurant is a project initiated byTrisomie 21, an association dedicated to helping people with Down's Syndrome to lead as independent and fulfilled a life as possible in all areas of society.It also holds the protected workshop label from the Ministry for the Family: It is a workplace where the structure and operational side has been fully adapted to the specific needs and individual abilities of people with disabled employee status.
It is open from Monday to Friday and offers a regional and international range of small dishes for greater variation.
OekosophPfaffenthal, at the heart of the ecological movement.
The Pfaffenthal district of Luxembourg City is home to the headquarters of the Ecological Movement and its regional brewery:Oekosoph.
The brewery's culinary philosophy is touse regional produce as much as possible to create vegetarian and vegan dishes. These dishes take pride of place on their menu alongside an invitation to reduce meat consumption in order to help protect animals and the climate.When served, the meat meets strict origin and farming criteria called "nose to tail".
The premises also embraces the concept of recycling by giving new life to old café furniture, which is lovingly restored and integrated into a modern setting.
From Monday to Friday,Oekosophoffers a daily lunch menu.From Wednesday onwards, an evening menu complements the culinary offering. Opening days and times vary according to the season.
Kaf Lokal: snacks with a big heart and important message
Impact Luxembourg - Impact story - Kaf Lokal (Video/Audio YouTube)
In the centre of Esch-sur-Alzette,Kaf Lokalis a location that combines a shop, a snack bar and artistic creations.Kaf Lokalcaptures the spirit of the social economy and focuses on local products.
In the restaurant,Kaf Lokaloffers cold and warm dishes to takeaway or eat on site. They are prepared using local or organic productsfrom theDen Escher GeméisguartandKalendulaprojects of theCentre d'initiative et de gestion local – CIGL Esch.Den Escher Geméisguartis a pilot project aimed at producing organic vegetables.Kalendulais an ecologically managed garden that promotes environmental education and is open to the general public. Both initiatives employ and train people who are being reintegrated into the labour market in the field of market gardening.
A wide range of goods are available in the boutique: food products as well as soaps and cosmetics. They all have one thing in common, the ingredients are locally sourced.This philosophy is also felt throughout the premises, which is decorated with works by local designers.
At present,Kaf Lokalis open Monday to Saturday from 10.00 to 18.00.
Bamyan: Afghan cuisine on the banks of the Alzette
Taking its name from a historic town and province in the snow-capped mountains of central Afghanistan,Bamyanis a family friendly restaurant serving authentic Afghan cuisine on the banks of the Alzette in Luxembourg City.
It was the first Afghan restaurant to open its doors in Luxembourg in 2022. The two couples who started the restaurant (the Modasirs and the Etemadis) are keen to showcase authentic Afghan specialities, such as Ashak (vegetable dumplings in a lentil sauce) or Qabuli (an aromatic rice dish with marinated beef and caramelised carrots).
To mark World Refugee Day 2023, the Brussels office of the 'United Nations Refugee Agency selected this restaurant as one of the most inspiring businessesfounded by or employing refugees.
At present, Bamyan is open Monday to Friday from 9.30 to 15.30.
Eis Kichen, inclusion in three dishes
Eis Kichenis an inclusive restaurant located in Wiltz, managed byCoopérations(non-profit association, cooperative and SIS). The daily menu is simple but satisfies all tastes: a soup and three main courses.The "Tradi", a typical Luxembourg dish; the "Geméizing", a vegan dish with a trilogy of local organic vegetables; and the "Dal mondo", a dish based on an international classic with a touch ofEis Kichen, which is available in certain weeks as the "Eis Burger".
It holds the protected workshop label from the Ministry of the Family and its team is mainly composed of people with special needs. Coopérations offers permanent work and training to people with disabilities through a network of inclusion workshops.
At present,Eis Kichenis open from Monday to Friday at lunchtime.
Last update29.01.2026
For more information
Ethical shopping in Luxembourg
The social and solidarity economy and societal impact companies
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/vegetable-restaurants-luxembourg.html
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Menus that consist of at least two-thirds fruits and vegetables, showcase culinary creativity, offer a limited environmental footprint and a positive social impact are the criteria judged by We're Smart World in their gastronomic guide "We're Smart Green". In Luxembourg, 14 restaurants have been awarded radishes, which are used to rank the best plant-based restaurants.
Radishes, small plants for ground-breaking restaurants
The "We're Smart Green Guide" uses an innovative approach to judge restaurants. It focuses onplant-based dishes. The menus must consist of at least two-thirds fruit and vegetables. However, they also evaluate theculinary creativity, as well as theecological footprintandsocial impact. As such, the restaurants selected are given between 1 and 5 radishes.
Would you like to eat in a restaurant where plant-based dishes go hand-in-hand with culinary excellence? Long gone are the days when vegetables were merely a side dish or used to decorate a plate! Here are the restaurants in Luxembourg, ranked according to their radishes by "We're Smart Green":
Most of these restaurants are already well-known by Luxembourgers. Learn more about them in the Gault&Millau 2025.
For their part, Fields, Ma Langue Sourit, Ryôdo, Léa Linster, Fani, Mosconi , La Villa de Camille et Julien and Archibald De Prince  areMichelin-starred restaurants.
Working towards a more plant-based diet and cuisine
The approach of the "We're Smart Green Guide", which combines high-quality gastronomy and sustainability, is in keeping with the changes witnessed in our societies towards more environmentally responsible consumption habits. The "Michelin Guide" has also recognised the environmental emergency and launched the green star to award excellence in sustainable gastronomy in 2020. It proves that the leading restaurants and culinary guides are in tune with the times.
In fact, according to a report published in theSmart Proteinreport (financed by the European Union)overall growth in the plant-based food sector increased by 49% between 2018 and 2020. Increased awareness of the ethical, environmental and health consequences has led many Europeans to reduce their consumption of meat and dairy products, or even to eliminate them completely from their diets.
A brief glossary of vegetarian and vegan terms
Vegetarians and vegans... more and more people are turning to a meat-free diet, but it's easy to get the terms mixed up. Here are a few tips to clear up any confusion!
Veganismgoes beyond food. It is away of life which excludes any animal-based products, not just in the food chain. For example, a true vegan would not buy leather shoes nor cosmetics tested on animals.
Vegetarianism is all about a healthy lifestyle not the latest fashion or trends. In fact, theWorld Health Organisationrecommendsa healthy diet with at least 400g of fruit and vegetables per dayand a fat-based energy intake of less than 30%. In Luxembourg and Europe, cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes and certain cancers are the leading cause of death. Being overweight and obesity are the main risk factors. To tackle this issue, theGesond iessen, Méi bewegen(Eat well and move more) programme encouragesa healthy diet and regular physical activity.
Last update02.03.2026
For more information
Michelin Guide Luxembourg 2025: Michelin-starred restaurants and Bib Gourmand
Gault&Millau Luxembourg 2026: the best chefs, restaurants and bars
Ethical shopping in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/jeunes-vignerons-defi-releve.html
Young winegrowers take up the challenge
Difficult weather conditions, digitalisation, organic farming, family traditions, and the health crisis – all things and situations that the rising generation of winegrowers are having to deal with. We spoke to three of them about the challenges and their passion for their work.
Pit Leonardy, president of the association 'Les jeunes vignerons des Domaines Vinsmoselle'
Pit Leonardy is president of the 'JongwënzerVinsmoselle'an association of young winegrowers in theDomaines Vinsmosellecooperative.
He began by talking about theweather conditions, which he considers the greatest challenge facing the young winegrowers: long-term planning, which is essential in winegrowing, is becoming increasingly difficult, as current weather conditions demand a short-term response. For instance, 2017 was a rainy year that was followed by 3 years with severe drought conditions.
The recenthealth crisisis an added complication, with the temporary closure of cafés, bars and restaurants at the beginning of the year and the cancellation of most wine festivals.
Butsolidarity with their colleagues and close contact with naturecontinue, and motivate the young winegrowers to keep at  their work with enjoyment and enthusiasm.
Pit Leonardy pointed out that thedigitalisationthat has swept through businesses in recent years has made administration and planning easier in both the vineyard and the cellar. Using these digital developments, winegrowing estates have become more efficient  and have made progress both ecologically and economically.
'JongwënzerVinsmoselle' is a not-for-profit association  that serves as aplatform for discussion among its member winegrowers. The members of winegrowing families and young winegrowers who have already taken over a business may use this platform todiscuss their experiences and make new contacts. Vinsmoselle winegrowerstotally support this cooperation: all their grapes are delivered here to be used in the production and marketing of wines in accordance with the principle of cooperation.
The rising generation is increasingly committed to the process and is developingthe 'JongwënzerVinsmoselle'range in close collaboration with their cellar masters. The range comprisesfour still wines and one sparkling wine (crémant): anauxerrois, apinot blanc, apinot gris, ariesling, and acrémant(made frompinot noirand chardonnay grapes). These aretypical grape varieties for Moselle wines, and each gives the wine its particular characteristic bouquet.
Bob Molling, the new youngster
Bob Mollingis the most recent arrival among the winegrowers. His grandparents used to produce grapes forDomaines Vinsmoselle. As a child he used to help at the grape harvest, which was the high point of the autumn as far as he was concerned. His parents did not take over the business, but the passion for wine caught up with him and he decided to drop his studies in economics andbacktrack to his grandparents' work. His enthusiasm is boosted bycontact with nature, themultiple aspects of the job, andrelations with customers.
In2019, hisfirst batch of wine, a blend ofpinot blancandauxerrois, produced about 1,400 bottles. In 2020 'Bob Molling Wines' expanded to include arieslingand apinot gris, with the prospect of acrémantin the near future - it's sure to find fans very quickly.
His aim is tolearn more about his vineyardsand the art ofshaping excellent wines, tolaunch his own production, and toestablish himself in the wine marketin the near future. To seek out customers, he has launched himself on the digital market: an Internet site and associated social media pages are currently in preparation.
But setting up as a winegrower can not be done without support, particularly since hedoes not have the necessary machinery. The newcomerhas the benefit of help from another wine producer,CavesDuhr-Maddalon, where he works part-time. In fact, Bob Molling produces his wines on his boss's premises , where he has the advantage of his employer's experience and infrastructures while at the same time being able todevelop at his own pace, in his own way.
Marie Kox has inherited the family tradition
This young winegrower joinedthe family business, theSunnen-Hoffmann winegrowing estate, after completing herstudies in oenology. With a sure but delicate touch, she is gradually making her mark on the estate which, for the pastfive generations, has been producing wines in keeping with nature, the better to reflect the characteristics of theterroirand the grape variety.
Encouraged by herinterest in scienceandnature, she is now a member of the generation - many of them women - that is taking over management of this sector in the Moselle region. Work placements and tasting sessions among students have strengthened her love of wine and her determination to take up the challenge ofcontinuing the family business successfully and satisfying its customersby achieving the same standards and the same quality.
Marie Kox is pleased that she does not have to make any  major investments in the immediate future, but is able to perfect anddevelop what already exists:making better use of the potential ofpinot noir, producing fair, genuine wines, committing to organic growing methods, etc.
She is still enthusiastic aboutthe diversity of the winemaking professionandthejoie de vivrethat wine represents. She takes great pleasure increating a good product that people enjoy.
Last update12.08.2024
For more information
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Special wines: rarities from the Moselle terroir
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/oenotourisme-luxembourg.html
Wine tourism in Luxembourg: a feast for the senses
In Luxembourg's Moselle region, wine takes on a whole new dimension, with exquisite tastings, opportunities to meet wine producers and enjoyable events all year round. Whether you live in Luxembourg or are just passing through, don't miss the opportunity to indulge in an immersive, accessible and delectable wine experience.
Discovering the source of delights
Wine tourism offers enthusiasts a perfect blend of wine and good food. This new type of holiday experience has been gaining momentum over the past few years, as the figures confirm (see inset).Large- and small-scale producers are appealing to a growing and increasingly knowledgeable audience, with opportunities for wine tasting and tours of wineries and vineyards all the way from Schengen to Wasserbillig.
Many associations, local authorities and industry consortia also organise day-long or weekend events where wine producers can present and sell their best vintages.
Domaines Vinsmoselle: the strength of a cooperative
Local leaders include theDomaines Vinsmosellecooperative, Luxembourg's largest producer of wine and crémant, which brings together some170 vintners. Domaines Vinsmoselle has four sites along the Moselle, in Remerschen, Wellenstein, Wormeldange and Grevenmacher, where staff take great pleasure in presenting the best vintages to visitors. Whether it's for a chance visit or an organised company outing,their facilities are suited to all occasions.
Independent wine growers: authenticity and passion
Independent wine growers (Privatwënzer)open their wineries and vineyards to visitors wishing to sample their local still and sparkling wines.
Make the most of the opportunity to learn more about their family stories and extraordinary architectural heritage in a relaxed, enjoyable setting. Some producers have even developed delicious menus based on local ingredients that will delight your taste buds.
A buoyant industry
According to a 2023 study by the Ministry of the Economy, 11% of tourists who spent at least one night in Luxembourg did a wine tasting or visited a winery. For tourists passing through, the number is even higher, standing at 13% or 360,000 people.
Events all year round
The main events for wine lovers are those held along the Moselle valley in Luxembourg:
Wine Cheese Enjoy (January and February)
If you fancysampling the best wines and crémants of the Moselle with a delicious raclette or fondue, the Wine Cheese Enjoy event is a must on your wine route.
Organised by the Moselle Tourist Information Centre, this winter culinary experience takes place at the beginning of the year. The combination ofcheese-based specialities paired perfectly with local still and sparkling winesinvariably goes down a treat.
Wine Taste Enjoy (late spring)
Fromelegant sparkling wines and sophisticated white grape varietieslike Riesling, Rivaner and Auxerrois, torosés, reds and rare ice and straw wines, Luxembourg's vineyards yield a cornucopia of treasures.
If you are interested inexploring all the Moselle wine region has to offer, we would strongly recommendthis festive eventthat takes place every year over Pentecost weekend in late spring.
Our vintners will be delighted to welcome you and give you the chance to sample their best products. The event also includes a packed programme of entertainment in a relaxed atmosphere over the two days.
Looking to soak up the authentic atmosphere at a traditional festival in a winegrowing village? Read on for our selection of great events:
This introduction to one of the most appealing forms of slow tourism would not be complete without mentioning another regional delight. Luxembourg is also known forits long tradition of fine fruit brandies. Every October, the distilleries along the Moselle put on an event called"D'Miselerland brennt"(Distillers' Day), which showcases the excellence of the fruit brandies produced from the region's orchards.
So come and check out Luxembourg's Moselle region, taking in local producers andsampling their extraordinary variety of still and sparkling wines all year round.
Last update26.01.2026
For more information
Special wines: rarities from the Moselle terroir
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
AOP – guaranteed good wines
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/domaine-kox-drone.html
A drone working for the L&R Kox Estate
Drones are in the process of revolutionising our society. Although certain sectors still await their entry into action, they have already begun to invade the world of wine. The L&R Kox Estate has been using a drone since 2019 to spray its vines.
A 1-metre white drone hovers overCorinne Kox's rows of vines.  With the help of its six propellers, this imposing ally of the winegrower takes off in the direction of the vineyards. With sensors and a crop protection product, it fights devastating fungi on grapes from the air. It weighs about 15 kilos each time it takes off, mainly because of its load. And it goes back-and-forth frequently. For 2.5 acres, it needs to fly 10 or 11 times, and the canister and battery need to be changed every time. It is a tiring task, confirms the winegrower.
'This year, we sprayed 7.4 acres with the drone,' Corinne Kox says. 'It's a very tiring job because the plots are not next to each other.' Overall, the young winegrower handles 30 acres, 22 of which are still treated the traditional way, with a helicopter or a tractor. For now, the drone still needs to coexist with these conventional devices. 'We don't use the drone to replace the other machinery. To me, the drone is an extra tool.' According to her, the technology is not yet good enough to handle all the plots. 'The risk of betting only on the drone would be too great,' she adds.
The drone is generally only used in spring and summer, every five days between May and July. The winegrower uses organic crop protection productsagainst fungi. 'Thefungicideswe use are only contact products. A mixture of sulphur and copper,' explains Corinne Kox.
Wine from old amphoras
The use ofamphorasis the oldest method of producing and preserving wines. These vases allow the vinification of a natural wine through spontaneous fermentation with the addition of minimal doses of sulphur before bottling. ThisGeorgian culturehas been "forgotten" for centuries and is now experiencing a revival. This old tradition of amphora vinification is now taking root in Luxembourg.Two kvevriswere installed in July 2014 atDomaine Viticole L&R Koxin Remich. The wines made from the kvevris are wines that can be kept for a long time. AtDomaineL&R Kox, the first grape varieties vinified in kvevri arePinot BlancandRiesling.
Source:DomaineL&R Kox
Advantages all the way
In 2019, the Luxembourgish young woman launched the project to spray her vineyards in order to prevent the appearance of fungi. She belongs toEurope's pioneers of this technique. It was initially some sort of experiment in partnership with Luxaviation. The winegrower then decided not to give up on these remote controlled devices. The idea has been emulated, because around 3 to 4 other winegrowers are now using drones to spray their vines.
And it's no coincidence that winegrowers are more interested in this type of technology.
 Even though the technology is not yet fully developed, the drone's interventionshave several advantages.  Unlike helicopters, drones can fly over the vines at alow altitude.  'It can fly lower and do a much more accurate job. It makes much less noise than a helicopter and it can fly over places that a tractor or helicopter can't reach, such as steeply sloping vineyards or close to houses,' says Corinne Kox.
In fact, the drone flies only two metres above the vines and involves no contact with the soil, which is important for the grapes' growth. According to the winemaker, the primary goal is tomaintain the integrity of the ecosystemsin the soil and thereby ensure the soil's sustainability. 'Tractors crush the soil and leave wheel tracks in it. Not to mention that soil compaction can lead to a lack of oxygen for the vines, which has an impact on the grape quality's evolution'.
Winegrowers also save time with this flying ally. According to the winegrower, the drone has the advantage of beingmore flexible in relation to the weather. In the morning dew for example, it can leave directly and one no longer needs to wait for the soil to dry. In such a situation, a tractor could slide down the slope and cause a serious accident.
Drones have a great future ahead of them
Since Corinne Kox took over the management of her parents' estate in 2019, she has been working in partnership withLuxaviationto spray the product for the treatment of her vines. The drone is owned by the aviation company and the winegrower only pays for the service to the company. She tells us that such a drone would cost around 15,000 euros, afinancial commitmentthat she does not intend to make. 'The company Luxaviation has all the necessary equipment. They have the staff, a team and all the technical equipment and know-how for this kind of work. What's more, technology changes so fast that you always run the risk of being overtaken by it,' she adds.
Corinne Kox is happy with the work of her remote-controlled ally. And her ambitions for the future are clear: next year, she wants to increase the number of plots to be treated.
Last update27.02.2026
For more information
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Special wines: rarities from the Moselle terroir
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/luxembourg-special-wines.html
Special wines: rarities from the Moselle terroir
Special wines from the Moselle terroir – a well-kept secret of Luxembourg. From the sparkling Crémant de Luxembourg to theFiederwäissen, the first wine of the season, to the late harvests, Luxembourg's vineyards surprise you every year with products of excellent quality, carefully crafted by winegrowers who are heirs to a tradition of more than 2,000 years. But be careful: quantities are extremely limited and there are many fans. Discover the special wines on this page.
Crémant de Luxembourg
Crémant de Luxembourg, a wine gem produced since 1991, is asparkling wine with refreshing acidity, created from local grapes. Served chilled, it accompanies every event in Luxembourg, from get-togethers among friends to official receptions. Thissparkling wine, available in white or rosé, is the fruit of the work of private winegrowers and cooperatives, which offers a rich palette of flavours and winemaking excellence with each tasting of Crémant de Luxembourg.
Its quality is assured by theProtected Designation of Origin(Appellation d'origine protégée, AOP), which guarantees that only the best practices, from the choice of grapes to their careful processing, allow this wine to bear the name "Crémant".
Fiederwäissen– a taste of the coming vintage
Delicate, slightly cloudy and sweet,Fiederwäissenis a white wine from the current harvest, in the process of fermenting. It is often seen as an indicator of the quality of wines from the same vintage.Served slightly chilled or at room temperature,Fiederwäissenreveals its unique fruity aromas. This wine is tasted exclusively in autumn and can be enjoyed on its own, as an aperitif, or with the traditional onion tart.
Its name comes from the "feathers" (Luxembourgish:Fiederen) that float in the wine, giving it its white, cloudy appearance. These "feathers" are actually the active yeasts that transform the sugar in grape juice into alcohol. Once fermentation is complete, the wine will lose its cloudy appearance and characteristic taste.
Late vintage wines: ice wine, straw wine and late harvest wine
Lateharvest wines are exceptional vintage wines: the grapes are produced meticulouslyand harvested long after the usual harvest when the summer draws to an end, and they are treated according to strict criteria that ensure the quality guaranteed by the"Appellation d’origine protégée – Moselle luxembourgeoise".
These rich wines are traditionally served withfoie gras, especially straw wine, but you can also enjoy them withblue cheeseor simplyat the end of a mealor to end a special day on a sweet note.
Vins spéciaux
Last update31.03.2026
For more information
AOP – guaranteed good wines
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Crémant
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/vintages-vineyard.html
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
The Luxembourg Moselle region is best known for its white wines, both still and sparkling. Riesling, a classy, fruity wine with mineral notes, is probably the most famous of the Grand Duchy's wines.Crémantsparkling wine is a must-have for festive occasions. Yet the Grand Duchy's offer of wines goes far beyond these two long-standing companions. The wide range of grape varieties grown in the Grand Duchy means there are wines to suit all tastes.Why not find out all about Luxembourg wines before taking a trip to the Moselle region? On your marks, with tasting glasses at the ready!
White wines to suit all tastes
The slopes of the Luxembourg Moselle region offer good ripening conditions for white grape varieties. The result istwo major categories of wines:lively, classy wines– made fromElbling,Pinot BlancandRieslinggrapes – and wines that arerounder and more aromatic– made from Rivaner,AuxerroisandPinot Grisgrapes. Let's look at the grape varieties in turn:
Looking for a'classic' among the Luxembourg Moselle wines?Go for one of the wines made fromElbling, Rivaner orAuxerroisgrapes. Or are you interested in trying the wines that have become more popular recently?Pinot,RieslingandChardonnayare good choices.
There are bubbles in the Grand Duchy too!
Over the past thirty years, Luxembourg's winegrowers have managed to create a sparkling wine that has aroused the enthusiasm of the most knowledgeable experts:Luxembourgcrémant. Since 1991, the name 'crémant' has been in use for quality sparkling wines, either white or rosé, that meet the strict conditions laid down by law. According to these conditions, the grapes must be picked by hand, and pressed whole, and thecuvéemust stay on the lees in the same winery for nine months.
Red wines are less well known, but are surprisingly good.
Although the Grand Duchy is known for its white wines, you also need to know about two varieties of grape used for red wines to complete your tour of the Grand Duchy's still wines:
A quick look at the different appellations
Introduced in the 1980s, the"Appellation d’origine protégée (AOP) – Moselle luxembourgeoise" protected designationhas allowed a development in the concept of thequalityof wine by adding an indication of itsorigin. The AOP scheme attests a product's quality based on its geographical origin. What does this principle of origin consist of? Briefly: the smaller the geographical unit indicated, the greater the notion of terroir and the stricter the criteria for quality.
According to these criteria, "AOP Moselle luxembourgeoise" wines are classified as follows:
Last update12.08.2024
For more information
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
AOP – guaranteed good wines
Sustainable wines in the making
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/moselle-a-grape-and-wine-growing-region.html
Moselle: a grape and wine growing region
Located in the East of the country, the Moselle is named after the river that draws the 42km of natural border between the Grand Duchy and Germany. Featuringmild climate, this land of flavours boasts along standing grape and wine growing traditiononly 20km from the Grand Duchy's capital.Wine plays the main role in this Moselle history that we invite you to experience. Discover the region by visiting its vineyards and cellars and tasting its wines, hiking, cycling or even by boat. It will not only be a delightful experience for lovers of white and sparkling wines, but also for those keen on nature and outdoor activities!
A long grape and wine growing tradition
Before travelling through the region from one end to the other, let's take a brief look at itshistory and geologyto find out why the Moselle is a region with a long grape and wine growing tradition.
This 250 million year-old valley was worked bythe Celts, Gauls and Romanswho already tended vineyards there! Monasteries extended the vineyard in theMiddle Agesand, towards the late19th century, production focused primarily on the Elbling grape variety for export to Germany. In fact, Luxembourg was part of theDeutsche Zollvereinsince 1842, the German Customs Union, and the musts were used to blend local wines or were transformed into cheap sparkling wine (Sekt). The1920'smarked the development and diversification of vineyards with the Wine Institute (Institut viti-vinicole) that was founded in Remich in 1925. With the establishment of theAppellation d’origine contrôlée – Moselle luxembourgeoise(protected designation of origin) in the1980's, Luxembourg wines and sparkling wines were given a key to the world.
The history of the valley and its wines takes place within well-defined geology. Between Schengen and Wasserbillig, the Moselle river has crafted ahilly landscape, cut out oflimestoneandclayey marl, representing an ideal birthplace for viticulture. In fact, these two different rock formations bestows upon Luxembourgish wines their distinct characteristics.
FromSchengen to Greiveldange, the valley is open, the hillsides slope gently and the vines grow on theclayey soil, resulting inrounded wines. In the canton ofGrevenmacherpredominate thelimestone slopeson which erosion has formed steeper slopes and a narrower valley. ​ Thesewinesare moreracy, in the image of the territory.
Fany a taste of this realm? There is something for everyone, follow us!
Walking through the vines...
Are you keen on thewine-growingside and would you like toexplore the Moselle vineyards? Come and walk through the valleyon foot or by bike.
If you are fond of sparkling wine, take the circular walk Crémant. Here, you will discover the three charming villages of Wellenstein, Bech-Kleinmacher and Schwebsange as well as the way of life and work in the vineyards. On this 4.8km themed trail, you will naturally learn all about this sparkling wine, Crémant.
If you are an avid hiker, theDream Loopsare a must, especially theWine and Nature Path Palmberg Ahn. ​ Covering 8.4km, the path starts in the wine-growing town of Ahn. Along limestone rocks, the route takes you through the Palmberg's vineyards with its breathtaking views of the Moselle Valley. Lush forests and orchids await you!
You can also discover the Moselle actively bybike. If you fancy a bigger adrenaline rush, themountain bike tour in Grevenmacheris a must. This tour starts near the archaeological site at Potaschberg, which forms the foundations of a 2nd century funerary monument and reminds us that the Romans were already winegrowers in the Moselle region!
Don't worry if you don't own a bike suitable for the tour you fancy doing: the Entente touristique de la Moselle luxembourgeoise offers a bike rental service:Rent a BikeMiselerland. With rental stations scattered over the region, the services not only include mountain bike and electric bike rentals, but also road assistance. Luggage transport is also available.
... then discover wines
Would you like to find out aboutwine related factorsthat play a role after the harvest, and in particular abouttastings?
Halfway between vines and glasses, theAm Herschtwalking trail will let you experience the atmosphere of harvesting (and only during this period!). After a 6km hike, enjoy a tasting ofFiederwäissen, the local wine undergoing fermentation, alongside onion tart. A real Luxembourgish tradition that goes hand in hand with a festive aperitif not to be missed!
Totastemore sophisticated wines and sparkling wines, a huge array is available:over 40 cellars and estatesawait you to discover Luxembourg's aromas. Are you a fan of Riesling - a racy fruity wine with mineral notes? Do you love the full aromas of Gewürztraminer? Select your wines and explore the wine estates of the Moselle.
If you want a tasting to discover wines and other regional local products, theWine Cheese Enjoyand theWine Taste Enjoyare just what you need. These two gastronomic events that take place in early February and on Whit Sunday bring together winemakers and restaurant owners to present thebest vintage wines with regional specialities. Make a note in your diary!
Off the beaten track
Do you fancy a completely new approach to discovering the region by following in the footsteps of the wines?
Driving for 115km along vineyards, the Moselle river and beautiful orchids, what better setting can you imagine for cruising around in yourvintage caror on your motorbike? This special route will take you to explore not only the picturesque villages and the endless vineyards, but also a unique cultural and river landscape. So fill up your fuel tank, put your sunglasses on and get ready for the ride!
Recreation boats are a perfect alternative for those who love ultimate relaxation. Aboard the boat known asPrincesse Marie-Astrid, enjoy the sunshine with a glass of sparkling wine as the vineyards, picturesque villages and gentle hills unfold.
At the end of your journey, you will have lots of experiences to share and the Moselle region will be yours -meng Musel.
Last update30.06.2025
For more information
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Hiking (I): Mullerthal and Moselle
Flavours
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours/bib-gourmand-michelin.html
Michelin Guide Luxembourg 2025: Michelin-starred restaurants and Bib Gourmand
Are you keen on culinary and avant-garde excellence? Do you love good food and are you looking for value for money? In Luxembourg, you can enjoy 11 Michelin-starred restaurants as well as 2 restaurants awarded the Bib Gourmand. The 2025 editions of the Bib Gourmand Benelux and Michelin Guide confirm the Grand Duchy is brimming with culinary creation.
Bib Gourmand: offering excellent value, quality and delight for money
For the past few years, the Bib Gourmand has been an ambassador for restaurants offering excellent value for money, quality and enjoyment. Whether you're looking for Asian, traditional, trendy or creative cuisine, every Bib Gourmand restaurant has its own distinct identity.
No new Luxembourg restaurants were selected in the 2025 edition and some no longer have this accolade. Thus, in 2025, onlytwo restaurants in Luxembourg hold the Bib Gourmand award:
Luxembourg is well worth exploring for its culinary treasures
Since the 2025 edition, two restaurants in Luxembourg now havetwo Michelin stars:
Ma Langue Sourit, which has held its two stars since 2018 and, until this year, was the only restaurant in this category in Luxembourg. The restaurant's chef, Cyril Molard, is undoubtedly the benchmark for gastronomes who love fine dining in the Grand Duchy.
This year, theLéa Linsterrestaurant climbed the culinary ladder after receiving its second Michelin star. Chef Louis Linster, who took over from his mother Léa as head chef a few years ago, has "crossed a new threshold of quality", according to the guide. "The classic finesse and elegance for which this establishment is renowned [...] has been subtly transformed under his guidance, giving way to more refined, contemporary dishes, judiciously spiced up with a few exotic flavours. The prestigious sauces devised by the chef add another dimension to each dish", added the jury.
​The constellation of restaurants withone Michelin starhas also changed.
To begin, theGrünewald Chef's Tablerestaurant, run by chef Clovis Degrave, has been awarded its first star. The chef has become well known in recent years with his Hostellerie du Grünewald restaurant and his Maison B brasserie. The guide describes his dishes at the Grünewald Chef's Table as "an explosive experience at the counter".
The restaurant run by chefArchibald De Princehas also received its first star. The former sous-chef to René Mathieu at La Distillerie opened his own hotel-restaurant in Lauterborn in 2024, and his hard work has been rewarded in no time. The judges highlighted “a creative, prestigious cuisine that gives pride of place to plant-based ingredients, while retaining some very fine animal protein dishes”.
For his part, chef René Mathieu left La Distillerie behind to embark on a new gastronomic adventure withFields, which was awarded one star. Although this is the new restaurant's first award, chef René Mathieu is no newcomer to the country's culinary stage. According to the jury, “[he] continues to shine with his way of putting vegetables, herbs and fruit on a pedestal”. As a result, it is the only restaurant in Luxembourg to have been awarded a green star.
Food lovers can therefore treat their taste buds in11 Michelin-starred restaurantsin Luxembourg, namely:
Michelin green stars
Did you know that the Michelin Guide also bestows green stars?  Green stars showcase the work of chefs who are striving to foster a more sustainable future.
Once again, the 2025 edition rewarded chef René Mathieu, who has taken a step that would have been difficult to comprehend just a few years ago:  working exclusively with plants in his Michelin-starred Fields by René Mathieu restaurant.
His vision of nature, his sustainable gastronomy and his inspirational story are winning over not only food critics, but also a growing number of food enthusiasts.
Last update07.05.2025
For more information
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Gault&Millau Luxembourg 2026: the best chefs, restaurants and bars
Luxembourg's vineyards - small but excellent
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/travailler-etudier-emploi-luxembourg-main-oeuvre.html
Luxembourg attracts international talent
A high quality of life, an open economy, attractive salaries and one of the highest minimum social wages in the world are just a few of the advantages that Luxembourg has to offer in its quest to attract international workers.
As a European leader with one of the strongest economies in Europe and the world,Luxembourg is an excellent place to start a business.The labour market, immersed in a multicultural environment, is a reflection of the180 nations currently living and working here.The country's workforce is therefore one of the determining factors in its competitiveness.
Luxembourg is taking significant steps to meet its need for skilled labour. The local labour market offers attractive conditions for companies and employees alike.Political stability, a prosperous economy, competitive salaries, a high quality of life, an international environment and a generous social systemare just some of the factors that enable Luxembourg to attract talent and companies from all over the world.
The Grand Duchy attracts talent
The Grand Duchy is one of the world's leading financial centres.To remain attractive and dynamic, and above all successful, recruiters are constantly searching for highly qualified, multilingual candidates.  This type of profile - a rare commodity on the local and European market - is sought from ever further afield.  However, the aim is not only to find the right people, but also to encourage them to stay in the country.
In response to this challenge, Luxembourg is taking important steps to meet its requirements for a skilled workforce.  This strategy is essential in certain key sectors to satisfy growing market needs in a highly competitive environment. These efforts are bearing fruit, as the Grand Duchy is now first in the global rankings with the highest proportion of highly skilled jobs (Global Innovation Index, 2021).  Furthermore, the World Talent Ranking 2024 report indicates thatLuxembourg has a high capacity to attract international talent, and the country ranks fourth in the world for the attractiveness of foreign labour.
Strategies for attracting and retaining skilled labour
Attracting and retaining new talent is a major challenge. That's why the Grand Duchy does its utmost to retain highly qualified employees. From a professional perspective, the government and companies are actively working with universities, in particular the University of Luxembourg, tooffer courses that are aligned with current market needs.Continuous training and professional certification are offered to maintain and foster skills.
Luxembourg is a safe country, with ahigh quality of lifeandattractive salariesin comparison to other European countries. Companies often pay premium wages for specialised skills. Moreover, the Grand Duchy has implemented a series oftax incentivesand administrative procedures to make it easier for skilled workers to settle in the country.
Several other factors help to attract and retain talent in our country. The local population welcomes foreigners with open arms, public education is free, society is multilingual and there is a wide range of leisure activities on offer.
For families, it is important to know thatchildcare is free.Every child below the age of 4 isguaranteed a place in childcare. In terms of social and family allowances, Luxembourg is one of the most generous European countries, with alow level of social security contributions.In addition, medical bills are largely reimbursedby theNational Health Fund.
Sectors with high demand for quality talent
As of January 2024, more than515,000 people worked in Luxembourg,and around one in ten were employed in the banking and insurance sector. The finance industry, which is home to various banks, investment funds and insurance companies, remains themost profitable economic sector, accounting for 31% of GDP.The success of this sector stems from a solid infrastructure, a highly skilled international workforce and Luxembourg's reputation as a gateway to Europe.
Consequently, the Grand Duchy ranks among the world's best performers in terms of investment and talent development. According to theIMD World Talent Ranking 2024report, the country has moved up five places with financial skills profiles.
There is also an ongoing demand for qualified professionals in thehealthcare sector. Biotechnology researchers are particularly in demand, given the growing need for healthcare services in view of an ever-increasing and ageing population.Construction and civil engineers, as well as architects, are also in high demand owing to infrastructure development and the construction of housing. With the initiatives in the field of ecological transition, skills in renewable energies and the management of environmental and sustainable projects are also increasingly needed.
Another sector that relies heavily on talented professionals isinformation technology (IT)with heightened needs in the fields of cybersecurity, IT development, artificial intelligence and database administration.
Cross-border workers are vital
Luxembourg is heavily dependent on an international workforce.  In fact,74% of the country's workforce is foreign, mainly from France, Belgium and Germany.Some 200,000 people travel to Luxembourg every day from these neighbouring countries.According to the employment agency (Adem), the proportion of cross-border workers has risen from 3% in 1961 to 47% in 2023.  Nearly 50% of all cross-border workers come from France.
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
Les langues au travail: le français prévalent
Luxembourg attracts international talent
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/coworking-spaces.html
Coworking spaces in Luxembourg
Read the article
Whether as an office for freelancers, a startup incubator, or an alternative to working from home: coworking spaces in Luxembourg offer a modern and flexible working environment for both cross-border workers and local professionals. They provide a workspace that fosters interdisciplinary collaboration, inspires creativity and meets the demands of an increasingly dynamic world of work. Here you can find out everything you need to know about coworking in the Grand Duchy.
Workday flexibility
Coworking spaces are much more than just shared office spaces: they are flexible working environments that can be tailored to the specific needs of their users. Modern workstations, well-equipped meeting rooms and a wide range of support services provide the perfect conditions for working productively – be it for individuals or teams.
For cross-border workers in particular, the coworking spaces in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg offer an attractive alternative to long commutes. One of the main benefits of this is a much healthier work-life balance. And unlike a home-based office, these spaces offer professional infrastructure, inspiring networks and personal interaction. They also make it possible to use existing resources more efficiently and sustainably. Coworking spaces therefore combine flexibility, community and a modern approach to work, making them ideally suited to the demands of today's professional world.
The coworking landscape in Luxembourg
Luxembourg has a thriving coworking scene and is home to a wide variety of workspaces in both urban and rural areas. This includes a broad selection of privately run spaces, but also some publicly funded ones, such as the"Al Schoul" coworking space for civil servants, which opened in Schieren in 2024.
Commuters and residents with long travel distances benefit from the well-connected locations in the border region, which are optimally linked to the country's main business hubs. Those looking for an urban coworking space in Luxembourg will find plenty of options in the capital. These offices not only benefit from their central location near the train station but also offer a range of extras, such as IT support, fitness facilities and laundry services.
A comprehensive overview of the different locations and providers can be found on thewebsite of the Luxembourg Workspace Association. From quiet private offices to open-plan space solutions, there is a suitable option for everyone. The spaces are designed to meet the unique and diverse needs of the users. For example, coworkers can book day passes or opt for a long-term membership. Thanks to digital booking systems, workspaces can be easily reserved in advance – whether for focused individual work or creative collaboration in inspiring settings (e.g. with views over Luxembourg's historic old town).
Startlokal: Offices and meeting rooms for freelancers and young businesses
The Startlokal of the Nordstad municipal syndicate in Erpeldange-sur-Sûre offers a diverse working environment: In addition to private offices for freelancers and young entrepreneurs, different meeting and workshop rooms of various sizes are available for rent. Furthermore, the Startlokal promotes a vibrant community focused on creativity and exchange.More information
More than just a workspace: incubators and hubs
In addition to conventional coworking spaces, Luxembourg is also home to various hubs and incubators, which provide startups and businesses with significant added value when it comes to flexible work arrangements. But companies don't just benefit from top-quality workspaces and meeting rooms for their employees – they also gain access to a strong ecosystem of expertise, sector-specific advice and direct networking opportunities.
Major hubs and incubators include:
Coworking and hubs for creatives
Luxembourg offers a number of coworking spaces tailored specifically to the needs of creatives, artists and cultural practitioners. These all aim to foster creativity, productivity and networking within the Grand Duchy.
Last update17.10.2025
For more information
5 key pointers for cross-border workers in Luxembourg
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/craftsmanship-luxembourg-figures.html
Craftsmanship, the driving force of the Luxembourg economy
With 98,000 active workers and 7,800 companies, the craft industry is considered to be Luxembourg's largest employer. Present in the food, construction, production and service sectors, it occupies a privileged place in the country's economic fabric.
Economic giant
Craftsmanship is particularly well established in Luxembourg. The number of craft enterprises has been increasing steadily since the 1990s. Today, the sector has around7,800 companies(2019). They represent21% of the companiesin the Grand Duchy.
Composed mainly ofsmall and medium-sized enterprises(SMEs), the craft sector is an economic giant and above all one of the country's main employers. While in 1970 it employed around 25,000 people, it will employ 98,040 in 2019, which represents an annual increase of 2.8%. On average, craft businesses employ 13 people and almost one person in five is employed in a manual trade in the Grand Duchy.
The craft industry brings together121 different activities. It is present in the sectors of food, fashion, health and hygiene, mechanics, construction, communication, multimedia and entertainment as well as in various craft activities.
Neither good or bad
Craft trades are on the upswing. Since the 1990s, the sector has continued to create jobs. This increase does not seem to be slowing down in the face of the danger of technological advances and the risk of making manual trades fall into decline. However, in the world of Luxembourg craftsmanship, everything seems to be going well, according to the figures provided by theChamber of Trades, which indicate that almost allmanual activitieshavedeveloped positively, due to strong economic growth. A trend that could be explained by the fact that the population continues to grow. This situation would have an impact on companies, which, to close the loop, would recruit staff again.
One branch of the craft industry that has been able to take advantage of the upturn in the market is that ofaestheticsand well-being. This phenomenon, which is becoming more and more a part of consumer habits, has been growing in the long term. In 1990 there were 80 beauty salons in the Grand Duchy, compared with 152 in 2019. The number of employees has even quadrupled from 238 to 921.
Despite this positive trend in some sectors, other branches of the craft industry have been affected by changes in their environment: structural changes, new skills, globalisation of markets or societal mutations. All these phenomena have had consequences for some trades, such as theprintinganddressmaking industries. In the world of clothing, a small industrial revolution had gradually taken hold over the years with the ready-to-wear market (prêt-à-porter), which gained in importance worldwide, at the expense of made-to-measure. This trend has certainly had an impact on the profession of the couturier, which is reflected in figures by a sharp decline in the number of people working in the fashion industry. In 1970, there were 277 employees compared to 134 employees in 2019 in Luxembourg.
A multinational workforce
The Grand Duchy is a win-win situation forcross-border workers, because the movement of cross-border craftsmen and women is also vital for the Luxembourg economy. According to statistics,more than half (52%)of the workforce comes from neighbouring countries. In 1990, the number of cross-border commuters represented 27% of employees in the craft industry. Thus, more than half of all employees do not live in Luxembourg. Of these, 51% live in France, 28% in Germany and 21% of cross-border commuters reside in Belgium.
At the same time, the share of foreign residents decreases from 47% to 33% between 1990 and 2019.
DAP or Master's Degree: the keys to open doors
Despite the fluctuations in the craft sector, it is undoubtedly on a positive trajectory, as it attracts more and more apprentices every year. In 2019,1,764 young people or adultshad registered for the Chamber of Trades'craft apprenticeshiprole. According to the figures, 92% of these young people find qualified employment immediately after passing the exam or continue their studies. Apprentices will complete their training with aDiplôme d'Aptitude Professionnelle(DAP)orCertificat de Capacité Professionnelle(CCP), which will give them a better chance in the job market.
In this way, the craft industry not only creates jobs, but also relies on apprenticeships, mobilising young people for employment. And with good reason, because the craft industry has developed the ideal conditions that enable it to consolidate its position as a leading employer by offering a wide range of outlets and real opportunities to become its own boss.
To run his own business in Luxembourg, the future boss must have theBrevet de Maîtrise(Master's Degree)in his pocket. This golden key, which approves the end of the training course, is considered to be the benchmark for setting up a business and training apprentices. The Brevet brings together all the theoretical, practical and pedagogical skills required to create and manage a business. In 2019, 110 people have obtained this coveted diploma.
Key Fact
According to a recentsurveyby the Chamber of Crafts and Trades, craft enterprisesneed 9,400 employeesin 2020. This labour requirement takes into account the creation of new jobs as well as the replacement of retiring employees or those who have been lured away by other economic sectors (industry, public sector, etc.).
Thus, the agepyramid of employeesshows that over the next ten years, between 20,000 and 23,000 retiring employees will have to be replaced in the craft sector (i.e. a quarter of current employees).
Last update06.03.2025
For more information
Skilled crafts - employment and transfer of know-how
Annen Plus - modern architecture has a name
Genaveh: Luxembourgish chocolate jewellery boxes
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/skilled-crafts-employment-transfer-know-how.html
Skilled crafts - employment and transfer of know-how
Several occupations come instantly to mind when we think of skilled crafts: florist, potter, sculptor, or wrought-iron artist, for instance. Yet skilled crafts are present in many more areas of economic and social life than you might first think. Mechanics, personal care, civil engineering, food and communication are all areas in which skilled crafts are involved.Thus skilled crafts occupy a considerable place in the economic fabric and play a key role in the creation of jobs in the Grand Duchy. In this context, the creation of new businesses and the transfer or take-over of businesses already in existence ensure the sustainability of the sector.
The leading employer in the Grand Duchy
The number of skilled craft businesses has been increasingly constantly since the 90s, and the number of jobs being created continues to grow too. With a total of 7,778 businesses, 98,040 employees and 1,764 apprentices,skilled trades were the Grand Duchy's leading employer in 2019, accounting for 21% of all employment. That means they play animportant role in combating unemploymentandoffer real career prospects.
Nevertheless, severalchallengesneed to be addressed in the coming years. Firstly, thegap between demand for employees and the number of workers resident in the Grand Duchy. In fact, 52% of the people employed in skilled crafts in the Grand Duchy live elsewhere. Although it shows that the sector is a vector for integration, there is still an urgent need of skilled labour if the sector is to remain competitive.
Secondly, theage pyramidofemployeesshows that more than 20,000 people will be retiring in the next ten years, and will therefore need to be replaced. 26% of employees in the sector are in fact over the age of 50, and they are key players in the transfer of know-how to the rising generation. The same is true ofmanagers: in 2019, for instance, more than 1,100 heads of businesses were over 60 years old, and many were looking for someone to take over their business.
In this context, it is essential that there should be a suitableeducational frameworkfor acquiring not only technical and manual skills but also the skills needed to run a business. In recent years, the Grand Duchy has developed a number of training courses for a vast range of careers in the skilled crafts sector.
The Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts has moreover set up abusiness transfer schemeto bring together people wishing to transmit a business and potential buyers, thereby promoting the transfer of businesses and helping to maintain continuity in the sector.
Closer look at the transfer of businesses
The transfer of businesses is an essential aspect of skilled trades since it ensures the stability of the sector and hence the creation of employment. Many heads of businesses feel, as they approach retirement, that the time has come to look for a successor and to prepare that person for taking over the business.
We talked to two entrepreneurs who recently took over established businesses in their respective fields, and asked them to tell us briefly about it.
Anne Le Moigne – Tartefine Bio Luxembourg
Anne Le Moigne took over the Boulangerie Scott bakery, which has a reputation for the quality of its products and its organic manufacturing, in 2018. Rebranded asTartefine Bio Luxembourg, the bakery has managed to take advantage of the long experience and skills, keeping on both its employees and the organic recipes which were its strong point.
We took over the bakery because it was a great business in the booming market for organic products. The former managers had based their development on innovation, and were pioneers in the field in the Grand Duchy. For us, it was important to take over a business that was financially sound and had considerable development potential.
It was relatively straightforward, since the team in place had many years of experience and seniority in the business. The people in change wanted to retire. I think they are pleased to see that their business is continuing, and that passing it on has been successful.
We see it as something very positive, in both human and professional terms. During the first few months, taking over a business is harder than setting up a new business. It's a bit like starting a new job, finding yourself part of a new team. And it's the same for the employees, who are obviously concerned about the change. Everyone has their own habits and ways of doing things, and everyone has to go outside their own comfort zone to get used to one another. It's important to get the team on board and put some drive into the change. We have achieved a good increase in turnover, and invested in equipment for making progress with new projects.
Patrick Elsen – Menuiserie Kraemer
Patrick Elsen took over theMenuiserie Kraemerjoinery business in 2018. Tradition, quality and skill are the main pillars of the business, which is still in the transfer process.
I was looking for a business of a certain size with a structure for production and project management. I'm an engineer by training, and I've already worked in project management. My family has always been involved in entrepreneurship, so it's something I'm familiar with. In life, it's often all about being in the right place at the right time, and for the Menuiserie Kraemer and myself that seems to have been the case.
We are still in the process at the moment, carrying out three projects at the same time:
I can't really say, since we're still in the middle of the process. What I can say, though, is that we have taken over the everyday business and day-to-day management. There are pros and cons in not growing as a business or in a field of activity. But one thing is sure - a business that's uncertain about itself has a bleak future. Once future prospects and strategy have been defined, it takes some time to renew structures, change mindsets and make changes at every level.
The interviews have been edited for the purposes of the article.
Last update06.03.2025
For more information
Training in the skilled crafts sector
Genaveh: Luxembourgish chocolate jewellery boxes
Employment in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/work-foreign-luxembourg.html
5 key pointers for cross-border workers in Luxembourg
Thanks to its attractive working conditions and its convenient location, Luxembourg is a real magnet for cross-border workers. During the day, the population of the Grand Duchy doubles due to the influx of workers from neighbouring Belgium, Germany and France. Although citizens from EU Member States or countries treated as such enjoy free access to the Luxembourg labour market, we have compiled answers to various questions that cross-border workers may still have.
1) Paying taxes as a cross-border worker
Cross-border workers are liable for taxation in Luxembourg. However, unlike other countries, there are no special tax rules for cross-border workers. Instead,the general withholding tax systemapplies, which means that taxes are deducted directly from cross-border workers' income. This includes salaries, wages, pensions and other income from an activity.To avoid double taxation, Luxembourg has signed double taxation agreementswith certain countries, including its neighbours,France,BelgiumandGermany.
Cross-border workers are only required to submit anincome tax return in Luxembourgundercertain conditions. If they choose to do so on a voluntary basis, it may be worth considering opting to betreated as a resident for tax purposes. However,cross-border workers may need to submit a tax declaration in their country of residenceif they or their spouse earn domestic income there.
Multilingualism and language courses
Multilingualismis one of Luxembourg's main characteristics.Luxembourgish, French and German are the main administrative languages. In theworkplace, other languages such as English or Portuguese are also frequently spoken. To give everyone the chance to learn new languages, there are many different options and schemes:
2) Recognition of diplomas and qualifications
There are various services responsible for therecognition of foreign diplomas and qualifications:
3) Social security cover for cross-border workers in Luxembourg
Any person who is employed in Luxembourg must be registered with theSocial Security Centre(CCSS). Registration with the CCSS provides employees with health and maternity insurance, pension insurance, accident insurance and long-term care insurance. Employers have to registeremployees with the Luxembourg social security centre within eight days of the start of their employment contract. Asocial security cardis then automatically sent to the registered employee.Social contributionsare deducted directly from the employee's salary, as are taxes. Cross-border workers mayalso register with a health insurance fund in their country of residence. The competent Luxembourg health insurance fund issues acertificatefor this purpose.
4) What health services are cross-border workers entitled to?
In the event of an illness, the Luxembourg health insurance fund covers some of the costs for the insured person. Cross-border workers can therefore be reimbursed for the costs of healthcare services via their competent fund. However, the health insurance fund only covershealthcare services provided by medical professionals or facilitiesthat are approved by the health insurance fund. To receive areimbursement for healthcare services in their country of residence, cross-border workers must also register with a health insurance fund there.
Adequate support for children
Parents often face the challenge ofjuggling their professional and family lives. However, as a cross-border worker in Luxembourg, you have various options to make life easier. The Grand Duchy offers the necessarysupport for infants and young adults:
5) Remote working as a cross-border worker
Cross-border workers who work from home must take bothsocial securityandtaxaspects into account.
Following on from a special scheme implemented during the Covid-19 pandemic, a new multinational framework agreement which entered into force on 1 July 2023 allows cross-border workers to work from home between 25% and 50% of their total working hours undercertain conditions,without this impacting their social security system.If the number of teleworking hours is below or above this percentage or if the framework agreement conditions are not met, theoriginal European Directivesapply. Therefore, people whose telework activity accounts for less than 25% of their total working time remain insured in their employer's country. For those who spend more than 50% of their working time in their home office,the social security system usually switches from the employer's country to the country of residence.
Different rules apply to tax liability. A cross-border worker's salary for days worked outside Luxembourg, e.g. when remote working, is generally taxed in the employee's country of residence. However, Luxembourg has concluded bilateral double taxation agreements with its neighbouring countries,which set tolerance thresholds (currently 34 days per year).If cross-border workers stay below this threshold, their salary is taxed in Luxembourg. If they exceed this threshold, whether by remote working or going on business trips abroad, the share of their income relating to the days worked outside Luxembourg is,in principle, subject only to taxation in their country of residence.
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
Free public transport
Family allowances
Practical guide to getting settled in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/luxembourg-job-market.html
Luxembourg's workforce
Relocating your company to Luxembourg? Trying to find out more about the local workforce? Luxembourg's employment market is unique in its own right. Deeply marked by its international openness, Luxembourg has become renowned as an innovation driver and a nurturing ground for personal and professional fulfilment. Join us on a short exploration of the factors that have convinced so many companies to choose Luxembourg as their entry hub to the European Union.
Globally united: Luxembourg's workforce
A country's workforce is one of the defining factors of its competitiveness. In Luxembourg,multiple waves of immigration, combined with lively cross-border trade, have laid the foundation to a workforce that is not only coming to Luxembourg from our three neighbouring countries, but also comprises large expat communities. Indeed, people from 170 nations are currently living and working together in Luxembourg's as a result of acontinuous policy of economic diversification and openness, which has become a globally recognised hallmark of Luxembourg.The international outlook of Luxembourg's economy, ranging from its large financial sector to logistics and research, are continuing to attract skilled and less skilled jobseekers to Luxembourg from beyond the national borders.
Moreover, Luxembourg's reputation as apreferred entry point to the EU single markethas served to attract many international companies to Luxembourg from different economic sectors, contributing to the already rich mix of employees available in the country. As a consequence, the country ranks among the world's best performers as far as the investment in and development of talents is concerned.
Add to this the multilingual and well-educated national workforce and you end up with arich mix of skills, personalities and nationalities.
Thriving in uncertain times: Luxembourg's economy
Luxembourg's economy as a whole has proven its resilience time and again over the past decades, weathering global crisis without losing its Triple A status. This is in part due to the efforts at economic diversification undertaken by generations of policymakers and stakeholders, but also to a strong support for innovation and development. It is therefore not astounding that the country hasthe highest GDP per capita in the world, according to theInternational Monetary Fundand theWorld Bank.
Finance remains the largest grossing single economic sector, contributing 31% to the country's GDP. This sector is building upon well-established infrastructures, a multinational expert workforce as well as Luxembourg's reputation as a European hub. Other sectors are cashing in on the same advantages though, attracting talents from all over the world, i.e. logistics and the automotive sector, but also the audiovisual sector, the digital economy, lifetech, fintech and space technologies, which have benefited from government-sponsored initiatives in their respective fields to make headlines worldwide.
Quality of life
If work-related opportunities are often the primary motivation for talents to move to Luxembourg, numerous other factors that create a healthy work-life balance contribute to the attraction and retention of talents in the country:
And finally, the elephant in the room:
QUICK FACT
43%
of Luxembourg's workforce comes from across its borders.
Social Model
Luxembourg rarely makes headlines with industrial actions. This is due to an efficienttripartisan consensual system called theTripartite. This model brings together representatives from trade unions, employers and the government in order to discuss challenges to economic growth as a whole or to a single economic sector. In their talks, these representatives are supported by a number of institutions which provide data and sectorial reports that are the basis of discussions.
Even if these negotiations are usually far from easy, they end with a consensus that all parties are able to live with in the interest of the common good. As a result,Luxembourg is prone to far fewer industrial actions than its neighbours.
So, what will your reason be to come to Luxembourg?
Last update17.10.2025
For more information
5 key pointers for cross-border workers in Luxembourg
Key sectors
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/languages-at-work.html
Languages at work: French prevails
In the Grand Duchy, Luxembourgish is by far the most common language, ahead of French, German and English. 49% of people say they use it at home or in public spaces. However, in the world of work, it is the French language which dominates and this is the case in the majority of sectors of activity.
Multilingualism is commonplace in Luxembourg. However, the choice of language varies according to the environment. While Luxembourgish is the dominant language at home and in public, French is the principal language at work. Three out of four residents work in a multilingual environment.
French and English - the most commonly used languages
According to the 2021 survey carried out by Statec: "Linguistic diversity on the rise", French is the most important language in the workplace.In the country's municipalities, the percentage of French speakers varies between 43% and 83%. In the capital, this percentage rises to 67%, which points towards a greater mixture of languages in the workplace.  In general, the study shows that slightly more than one-third speak French only at school or at work, while slightly less than one-third use it in both environments.
The languages used depend largely on the sector of activity. French is the most widely used language in almost all sectors, but it is followed by English, which has become the second most spoken language in the workplace.  It is predominant in the banking, finance and insurance sectors, as well as in international trade and European institutions.  This also explains why the highest proportion of English speakers are found in municipalities such asNiederanven(63%) andSandweiler(59%), and even in Luxembourg's capital (58%), places where major international companies are located.
Useful information
TheNational Institute for Languages Luxembourg (INLL)is a public centre for the learning and certification of modern language skills for adults. It is committed to promoting multilingualism, a key component to social integration and employability, and offers courses in nine different languages.
Its certifications include theSprochentest Lëtzebuergeschwhich allows holders to obtain Luxembourgish nationality.
A different language for each sector
As for Luxembourgish, it also has a role to play in the workplace. It is the most commonly spoken language at home but it is surpassed by French and English in the workplace. It is slightly more widespread throughout the country. However, it is used less around the capital (30% to 56%) and more in the other regions (69% to 95%). Luxembourgish is mainly spoken in public administration and education.
Portuguese is often spoken in the construction and administrative services sectors, as well as in the hotel and building cleaning industries. The Portuguese language is used throughout most of the country, with a strong presence in north-westGutlandand the Minette region in the south-west. However, according to Statec, it surprisingly underrepresented in the capital (8%). Generally speaking, Portuguese is either spoken only at home, or at home and at work, according to the national statistics agency.
German is very present in the sectors of health, public administration, industry and commerce. Nevertheless, almost a quarter speak it only at work or at school, especially in the east of the country.
Multilingualism - the key to success
Luxembourgish, French, German, English, Portuguese, Italian and Spanish are the most common languages used in Luxembourg. Moreover,code switching(the need to switch from one language to another) is part of daily life in the Grand Duchy. This is hardly surprising as foreign residents represent 47% of the population and more than 210,000 cross-border workers come to work in Luxembourg every day. As such, it has become customary to converse in several languages on a daily basis. The professional world is no exception.
In 2019, the last time the "Languages at work" study by the University of Luxembourg was updated, almost half of the job offers in the sample demanded knowledge of the three official languages of the country: Luxembourgish, German and French. In the same year, French remained the language that was most requested in the job offers analysed. The report noted a significant increase in demand for Luxembourgish between 2014 and 2019 rising from 50% to 67% in the job ads surveyed. The demand for English varies greatly from one field of activity to another and is often focused on the international and financial sectors. Increasingly,employers are actively looking for multilingualism in their workforce.
The Statec publicationRegardsn° 04 – 01/2021, analysing the main determinants of wages in Luxembourg, also notes that skills acquired outside the formal education system, such as language skills or social skills, have an impact on wage levels.
Last update22.05.2025
For more information
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
Luxembourg's workforce
What languages do people speak in Luxembourg?
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg/start-your-own-business.html
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
Are you ready to fulfil your professional dreams? Now is the time to embrace your true passion in Luxembourg by embarking on a professional adventure in which you decide the future! Set out below are the key partners and the full range of services, training courses and support you need to help you turn your project into a success story.
Assistance and support from experts throughout the process
It's comforting to have a competent partner by your side. Luxembourg is home to a large number of organisations dedicated to fostering entrepreneurship and creating an economic environment in which domestic and foreign companies can thrive. These organisations are your primary point of contact for discussing your project, receiving training or applying for start-up grants.
Strong partners at your side
At every stage of the business-creation process, variousdepartments, institutions and associations are on hand to provide their support. Experts in every field will answer your questions and make sure you meet all the obligations in terms of affiliation. Get in touch with them!
Training that drives you forward
Thecatalogue of training courses available to entrepreneursis equally impressive. Here is a list of the institutional players who offer the courses:
S.à.r.l.-S - an easy way to start your business
TheS.à.r.l.-S(Simplified limited liability company)is the ideal option for budding entrepreneurs.It combines the advantages of a traditional limited company with simplified administrative procedures. The S.à.r.l.-S stands out owing to:
Do you want more information? Check Luxembourg's administrative portalGuichet.lu for more information!
Guichet.lu provides all the information you need online on procedures and assistance
No other website in Luxembourg provides as much information on the procedures and steps to be takenas the Business section ofGuichet.lu. In the"Starting up and development"section, the website outlines the steps and procedures to be followed in detail and in a way that is easy to understand. This tool is vital for anyone looking to create their own business. It offers key information to be considered before setting up a company and provides precise information on accessing the profession and acquiring a business permit.
Furthermore, you'll find all thesupport you can receive to help you become professionally independent:
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Luxembourg's workforce
Entrepreneur stories
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/digital-learning-hub-informatique.html
Calling all digital enthusiasts!
As new technologies advance at breath-taking speed, the need for labour in the IT sector is soaring. More than ever before, employers are coveting IT talent. Currently, there are around 1,700 job vacancies in the digital sector in Luxembourg. To better meet this demand, the Grand Duchy has set up a modern training centre to develop IT skills at national level.
Where would we be in life withoutcomputers? They are ubiquitous and, without a doubt, facilitate our daily life. In fact, they have become anindispensable toolin our private and professional lives: from first thing in the morning when we make our coffee to when we drive our car or when we clock-in at work. Moreover, we use them for our online communications, checking bank accounts on the Internet and shopping in virtual shops. Software and algorithms follow our every move and shape the world we live in. In short, IT has literally embedded itself into our existence.
Urgent need for IT experts
A more computer-based society is bound to have a greater need for IT experts. This is where the challenge begins, because you have to find the developers with the right skills. The needs of companies have never been greater in terms of seeking new qualified professionals to respond to technological and digital challenges. At the end of 2022, about4,288 IT vacancieswere registered at theNational Employment Agency (Adem). However, only 550 people were enrolled in this sector. Therefore, there are still numerous positions and opportunities for new professionals.
In terms of job creation in the IT sector, we observed a huge surge on the market between November 2017 and November 2022. 676 vacancies were registered in 2017 compared to 1,690 vacancies in 2022, i.e. anincrease of 150%.
The sectors with the greatest demand and constant need for IT talent are thebanking and finance industry, as well asconsulting and auditing firms. In general, the profiles most sought-after by these companies are full-stack developers (IT/web/full-stack developers), IT engineers, business/BI/data analysts, IT project managers and IT administrators, according to the Adem.
DLH aims to reduce the skills gap
As we have observed, IT remains an attractive field, with a broad and diversified range of job opportunities. At present, the industry employs about 3,500 people and yet more developers need to be trained. This is where theDigital Learning Hub (DLH)and theEcole42(specialised in coding) come into the picture.
In many respects, these institutions were created in response to the growing demand for digital skills on the Luxembourg labour market. Located in the Terres Rouges building in Belval, the Digital Learning Hub is acontinuing vocational training centrethat focuses on creativity, autonomy and teamwork. It offers short training courses for people who want to learn more about the industry, improve their skills or change careers. The fields of expertise of the DLH are coding, cybersecurity, blockchain and Design Thinking.
It is currently spearheaded by theEcole 42, which is the flagship of the DLH. The programme in this school, which welcomed its first students in September, is unique: it is open 24/7 and the students set their own schedule. In other words, participants learn to code without taking a course, without a teacher and, above all, without taking an exam. During the training courses, students have to help each other, which helps to foster teamwork. In fact, what seems like a completely absurd idea on the surface, works perfectly in reality. Ecole 42 is one of the best programming schools in the world.
Last update10.03.2025
Training the coders of tomorrow at 42 Luxembourg
Entrepreneurial education by the association Jonk Entrepreneuren Luxembourg
Lifelong Learning
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/42-luxembourg.html
Training the coders of tomorrow at 42 Luxembourg
The digital transformation is redefining careers and skills. Expertise in coding has become a key asset for innovation and accessing the job market – and that's exactly what 42 Luxembourg wants to teach people. At 42, you learn through creating, experimenting and collaborating with others. No teachers, no tuition – instead a series of projects, challenges to tackle alone or as a group. This flagship centre for digital education in Luxembourg, part of the Digital Learning Hub, is training up a talented new generation to shape the future of computing.
Digital Learning Hub
Since theDigital Learning Hub (DLH)was launched in 2022, it has become a key player in boosting digital skills in Luxembourg. The Belval-based initiative offerstraining for all adults– no prior qualifications required – in essential fields likecybersecurity, data and AI, blockchain, cloud computing, design thinking and web development. Courses range from short workshops to structured programmes, always rooted in practice and collaborative learning.
The DLH strategy involveslearning by doingand peer-to-peer exchange to stimulate creativity, autonomy and innovation. Alongside more traditional courses, the DLH also houses42 Luxembourg, an innovative computer programming school where students learn through practical projects and teamwork, with no teachers or traditional classes.
DLH in practice
Located in theTerres Rougesbuilding in Belval, the Digital Learning Hub and 42 Luxembourg share a modern infrastructure spread over two floors. The campus offersopen, versatile spaces,fully equipped computer labs, and aFabLabfor design and prototyping (3D printers, laser cutters, etc.). There are alsomulti-purpose classrooms, arelaxation roomand acanteen, all creating an environment conducive to learning and innovation.
42 Luxembourg: no teachers, no lessons, no exams
42 Luxembourglaunched its first campus in Luxembourg in 2023, within the Digital Learning Hub. The network of coding schools, founded in Paris in 2013, now has54 campuses in 31 countries. The Luxembourg branch offersextensive and specialised programming training, with students progressing through levels rather than completing exams.
What makes it unique is that the teaching is based onpeer-to-peer learning, in other wordsparticipation and interaction between students.The school isopen 24/7and there are no teachers. However, there are educational teams on hand to support students and help them find their own solutions. To progress at 42, you need to work in a group, call on the community to challenge yourself and then share your findings with your peers.
Trial period at thePiscine
Before embarking on a training course, candidates have to throw themselves in at the deep end, in thePiscine, for an initial intensive course.This launch phase is an opportunity to find out about all the learning methods involved in the training.
Over a four-week period, candidates are placed in real-life situationsand set tasks which they have to resolve independently. This is a way for learners to see whether 42 Luxembourg is for them and whether the school's teaching approach suits them. No previous coding skills are necessary. Regardless of their level of knowledge, 42 seeks to challenge candidates to perform to the best of their ability in the Piscine. Once this first stage is over, the journey really begins!
Discover 42 Luxembourg: Unlock Your Potential in Tech (Video/Audio YouTube)
42 in a nutshell:
Last update30.10.2025
For more information
Lifelong Learning
Technological environment
Higher education institutions
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/education-entrepreneur-school-luxembourg.html
Entrepreneurial education by the association Jonk Entrepreneuren Luxembourg
Learn to foster and develop an entrepreneurial spirit, prepare for the future using the "learning by doing" method and inspire, innovate, create... These are the key phrases and words which embody the entrepreneurial education programme of the associationJonk EntrepreneurenLuxembourg which is already part of the curriculum in several schools. We spoke to Nadia Battello, the company's director, about the association's programmes and values.
An introduction to the subject
Three questions to Nadia Battello, the director ofJonk EntrepreneurenLuxembourg
Please tell us more about the association, its mission and values...
Jonk EntrepreneurenLuxembourg asblhas a clear mission: to nurture an entrepreneurial spirit in the younger generation by inspiring and supporting them in turning their ideas into reality, and by encouraging them to get actively involved in society.To achieve this goal, we offer a wide range of educational programmes aimed at developing various skills, such as creativity, innovation, proactivity and responsibility.
Inclusivity is at the heart of our values:each person should feel respected, valued and encouraged to fulfil their potential, regardless of their social or educational background.
We aim to help theparticipants to achieve a positive and lasting transformation, with a clear focus on cultivatingteam spirit. The cooperation between young people and professionals creates an inspiring experience with opportunities for experimentation and exploration, which developstheir self-confidence and ability to foster innovative thinking.
The goal is to help young people to learn how to seize opportunities, take responsibility and acquire an entrepreneurial mindset through practical experience.These fundamental principles shape a generation of passionate young leaders, ready to make a positive and lasting contribution to society.
Could you give us more information about themini-enterprisesprogramme in secondary education and the Young Enterprise Project in higher education?
In secondary education,themini-entreprisesproject is proving to be a powerful catalyst for stimulating an entrepreneurial spirit among secondary school students. Throughout a whole year, students embark on an entrepreneurial adventure by creating and running their ownmini-enterprise, making decisions and taking responsibility for various issues such as management, human resources, accounting and marketing.
At the heart of this programme, teachers are no longer simply purveyors of knowledge, they embrace the role of "coaches". By interacting withbusiness professionals, students gain an outlook on the real world.
At the end of the school year, pupils have the opportunity to take part in the "Mini-EnterpriseFinals", an annual competition that recognises the best projects of the year. The winning team may even have the chance to represent Luxembourg at an international competition.
As part of theYoung Enterprise Projectambitious young people take up the challenge of unearthing an innovative, feasible and economically viable idea for a product or service, and developing a solid business model around it.
For the duration of the programme, the participants benefit from the support of professionalsand are encouraged to create prototypes. They also get to present their projects to a panel of judges at a national competition.Subsequently, the winning team will have the unique opportunity to represent Luxembourg at the European final.
Beyond the competitive aspect,the Young Enterprise Project aims to nurturestudents' entrepreneurial and personal skills, such as creativity, perseverance, self-confidence, initiative, teamwork and a sense of responsibility.
What do you like the most about working with young creatives and entrepreneurs?
Our programmes go beyond books and traditional classrooms. My objective is to cultivate positive learning experiences that serve as catalysts to help the younger generation blossom. It is through this quest that my passion is perfectly attuned to the mission ofJonk EntrepreneurenLuxembourg:learn how to be an entrepreneur.
I firmly believe that education shapes the citizens of tomorrowand provides the foundation for a robust and resilient society which is ready to face the challenges of the future. We putstudents at the heart of the process: our approach encourages them to turn their ideas into reality. It also gives them a sense of responsibility and encourages practical, multi-disciplinary learning.
On a personal level, I find it immenselyfulfilling to meet young people brimming with ideas, ambition and passion, and I get to make an active contribution to their development.
Last update10.03.2025
For more information
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
University students - budding entrepreneurs
Éducation entrepreneuriale: quand des projets scolaires deviennent des startups à succès
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/education-entrepreneur-ecole-luxembourg.html
Entrepreneurial education: when school projects turn into successful start-ups
Learn to foster and develop an entrepreneurial spirit, prepare for the future using the "learning by doing" method and inspire, innovate, create... These are the key phrases and words which embody the entrepreneurial education programme of theJonk EntrepreneurenLuxembourg association which is already part of the curriculum in several schools. We would like to present four companies to you whose success story began at school!
SOVI Solutions S.à.r.l.
SOVI Solutions S.à r.l.was founded in2019.Its main activityis to developsoftwarethat helpspeople with special needsto better communicate and express themselveson a daily basis.Talkiiis adownloadable appavailable via the Google Play Store, and acommunication tool whichis custom-made, pre-configured and distributed by the company. They also offertraining coursesin order to familiarise the persons accompanying the user with the program's "alternative and advanced communication". These courses are vitalto identify the individual needsof each user and then to customise the options in Talkii.
After winning the final of the "Young Enterprise Project" in 2018, the young entrepreneurs signed up for several other competitions for startups, in particular the Impuls competition organised by Nyuko, Fit 4 Start andStartupsVsCovid19organised byLuxinnovationand the Ministry of the Economy. At present, SOVI Solutions has about a hundred clients at national level and is in the process of forging international connections.
It isvitalto integrateTalkiiintoschoolsdeclares Gianluca Marinelli. Individuals with speech difficulties canaccess their communication tool at any time(Talkii Tab). Also, it is essential to properly train the teaching staff, parents and speech therapists whoconfigure the tool according to individual needsvia the configuration telephone (Talkii Supervisor).
Neon Internet
Neon Internetis an agency that developsapplications and marketing campaigns with a focus on new media, such as artificial intelligence, blockchain and social media. In addition to various advertising campaigns produced over the years, in 2023,the agency createdLetzAI, the first online platform enabling users to generate images which reflect our local communities and experiences made in Luxembourg. Moreover, it managestheNeontools.ioplatform, a toolbox for digital marketing.
Neon's ecosystem has little in common with the former mini-enterprise with whichMichel Strotzwas involved during secondary school. He was thedirector of the mini-enterpriseStyFly, atraditional advertising agencywhich produced business cards, flyers and other printed material. Today, he is the only member of the team who is still working in the field of communication, an industry which has changed immensely since then: 12 years ago, digital marketing barely existed and the term "social network" had just been coined.
The mini-enterprise allowed him to learn a great deal aboutthe creative market, the demands of clients in the communications sector and the various dynamics of a team. He was able to acquire professional skills which remain useful to this day. Having gained self-confidence, the young entrepreneur was convinced that he could launch any creative company successfully. Moreover, his IT studies supplemented his broad range of skills. He has programmed several of his own social networks, experimenting with programs such asDepixit, a platform for transforming and encrypting images into pixel grids andNightler, an app for night owls and travellers. The objective was clearcut - to launch a new company. This endeavour was finally achieved in 2018 together with Karim Youssef, the co-founder.
At present, Michel Strotz provides assistance toJonk Entrepreneurenby offeringtrainingandadditionalsupportto young people, in the form ofsponsoringand other types ofeducational gifts. From a personal perspective, the mini-enterprises programme was one of the most important experiences of his school career. He believes that it is essentialtooffer real-life experiences to young peoplein addition to standard education.
Brainplug
Brainplugis acommunication agencylocated in Colmar-Berg.Michel Logelingfounded the company with his friendJérôme Houdremontin February2018. The agency essentially offersservices in the field of content creation and digital media. In a digital world, the services offered helpBrainplug'sclients form closer ties with their customers. This bond is created by fosteringempathyand embracing human behaviourand placing them at the heart of strategicmarketing research.
Michel Logelinggained hisfirst experience as an entrepreneurat the age of 17 in secondary school, during themini-enterprise lessonstaught by theJonk Entrepreneurenassociation Luxembourg. Their group, a company with 13 pupils, developeda card game to play "Konter a Matt", a traditional pastime in Luxembourg. Their goal was to revive this tradition in Luxembourg, especially amongst younger generations. With their product, the young entrepreneurs impressed the jury and theywonthe first prize at the national competition of mini-enterprises.
This programme finally gave them a taste for entrepreneurship. Michel Logeling discovered hispassion for communication and audiovisual content creation. During his university studies in Strasbourg, he founded amarketing agency,Brainplugand his still works there today!
In his opinion, theadvantage of this educational projectis above all itstangibility. Without a doubt, it was the first class in secondary school which gave him thelibertytoexpress his creativityand enabled him tosee the actual tangible benefitof his work. Also, these programmes, in contrast to many other classes, nurture skills suchgroup work,creativityandproblem solving. As anAlumni, he tries tostay in contact with the associationandgets actively involvedas often as possiblein their programmes, either as acoachorspeakerin classrooms.
FrëschKëscht
TheFrëschKëschtadventure began in 2019, whenseven studentscreated a mini-enterprise as part of theJonk Entrepreneurenprogramme with the goal ofdoing something positive for the environment and local economy. To achieve this goal, they decided tosell boxes filled with seasonal fruit, vegetables and other delicacies, 100% made in Luxembourg. Clients had the option tocollecttheir FrëschKëschteach weekin Steinsel or to have itdeliveredto their doorstep.
In July2020, the small company was awardedthe best mini-enterpriseof the year and its founders decided tocontinue to pursue their dream. They therefore decided totransform their student project into an independent business.However, the business has evolved over the last few years owing to the founders desire to continue their studies.Today, they continue to sell boxes, crafted with love and containing products exclusively sourced from Luxembourg. Theseitems have a longer shelf-lifeand are prepared for thefestive season or special occasions, such as Christmas.The customer base has also changed a great deal. At the start of their entrepreneurial adventure, they delivered mainly to private customers,however today it's mainly businesses that are interested in their offer.
Gaïa Costadura, co-founder and former head of the marketing department, believes the strength of mini-enterprises is, above all, aboutputting theory into practice. In secondary school, pupils learn about the concept of economics but it is the mini-enterprise that enables them to discover the world of entrepreneurship from a practical and experimental perspective. This project also taught her two things: firstly,to step outside her comfort zoneand secondly, tobelieve that all dreams can come trueif you work hard enough and really believe in them. Ivo Silvaand Gaïa Costadura were invited to the awards ceremony for the 2021 mini-entreprises finals in order to pass on their experienceto future young entrepreneurs.
Last update30.10.2024
For more information
Entrepreneurial education by the association Jonk Entrepreneuren Luxembourg
University students - budding entrepreneurs
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/training-in-the-skilled-crafts-sector.html
Training in the skilled crafts sector
Some jobs spring immediately to mind when 'skilled crafts' are mentioned: designer, jeweller, book-binder, potter, weaver, glassworker, for instance. Yet craft work is present in many more areas of economic and social life than you might first think. Clusters of craft work are present in the foodstuffs, health, personal care, mechanical, civil engineering, completion and communication sectors, and in many others.A wide range of training courses as well as apprenticeships with a master craftsperson and mentoring enable young people and people wanting to make a career change to join a sector that is hugely dynamic in the Grand Duchy.
The Grand Duchy offers a wide range of training courses
In 2019, the skilled crafts sector was the leading employer in the Grand Duchy, providing 21% of all employment. That means it plays an important role in combating unemployment and offers real career prospects. In this context, it is essential that there should be a suitable educational framework for acquiring not only technical and manual skills but also the skills needed to run a business.
In recent years, the Grand Duchy has developed a number of training courses for a vast number of careers in the skilled crafts sector.
There are three levels of training.
Courses for gaining an initial qualification in the skilled crafts sector
TheDAP is the standard qualificationensuring craft work of quality carried out according to professional rules and best practices. Training courses leading to two new qualifications were added in 2018. As for the CCP, it enables less skilled people to follow basic training and get a job. The DT is available for a limited number of trades; it may provide an alternative route or an addition to the DAP training.
The key word in this level of training isapprenticeship. Apprentices attend ageneral training courseat atechnical secondary school (lycée technique)and receivepractical trainingunder the guidance of an employer in a duly recognised and qualifiedtraining company.
In 2019, the number of apprentices registered with the Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts (Chambre des Métiers) reached 1,764, makingthe skilled crafts sectortheleading training bodyin the Grand Duchy.
Theapprenticeship schemeis also the way foradultsto acquire a professional qualification.
Training courses for future entrepreneurs and heads of craft businesses
Given the importance of the skilled crafts sector for the creation of jobs in the Grand Duchy, it is essential to ensure the renewal of the economic fabric. It's thecreation of new businessesand thetransfer or take-over of businesses already in existencethat ensures the sustainability of the sector.
TheMaster Craftsman's Certificate(BdM) is the standardat this level. The training course provides the theoretical, practical and educational skills needed for creating and running a business, and for training others and passing on skills. In the Grand Duchy aboutthirty BdM coursesare available in various fields; 15 new courses will be added by 2025.
"The Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts is working on expanding the range of higher education courses by adding anad hocoffer of courses leading to a BTS or a Bachelor's or Master's degree as part of cross-border collaboration."Key figures for the skilled crafts sector in 2019. Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts.
Higher education
TheHigher Technician Certificate(BTS)is a short higher education course lasting two years that is in keeping with the sector's professional development process. In 2020, there are as many as 30 BTS qualifications, obtained by initial training and by thevalidation of non-formal and informal training. It should be noted that this training is considered higher education from the professional point of view, even though in the Grand Duchy it is still classified in Level 5 of theLuxembourg Qualifications Framework, as is the Master Craftsman's Certificate.
Beyond this level, the studies leading to a Bachelor's or Master's degree are not always directly linked to jobs in the skilled crafts sector, but businesses in the sector also employ people with university qualifications, such as accountants, legal experts, engineers, etc.
Last update10.03.2025
For more information
Lifelong Learning
Higher education institutions
Education
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/university-students-entrepreneurs.html
University students - budding entrepreneurs
Aware of the need to prepare their students for the ever-increasing challenges on the labour market, the University of Luxembourg has created the Entrepreneurship Programme and the Incubator. These initiatives offer students training as well as events dedicated to developing the essential skills for launching start-ups. During the 'Ideation Camp', the University transforms into a stronghold of the ideas generation, who have already inspired the creation of young companies that are now established at the University.
Bridging student life and professional life
The Entrepreneurship Programme: development of skills
The University of Luxembourg has created theEntrepreneurship Programmeto better prepare entrepreneurial students to manage their own business. The initiative is dedicated to nurturingbusiness, technical and personal development skillsthus enabling participants to make their business start-up a success.
The programme is open to students from all faculties of the University of Luxembourg, regardless of their level of education:bachelor, master's or PhD. It is also open toUniversity staff.
The mission of the Entrepreneurship Programme is to promote entrepreneurship education in the framework of the 3rd industrial revolution in the Grand Duchy. The objective is to train entrepreneurial leaders who will foster significant economic and social value for Luxembourg and integrate the University of Luxembourg and its research institutions into the Luxembourg entrepreneurial ecosystem, thereby acting as a link between the world of education and the business world.
The incubator: creation of businesses
For its part, as soon as the participants have acquired the essential skills, theIncubatorhelps them to create their companies. As such, students who have decided to start their own business can receive backing from the Incubator in order to bring their ideas to market.
In this accommodating environment, the Incubator invites Luxembourg and foreign entrepreneurs to share their stories and give advice to those who want to embark on a similar journey. Avast network of expertshelps budding entrepreneurs take the necessary steps from the registration of the company in Luxembourg to fundraising and establishing contacts with clients.
The Incubator also provides the blossoming entrepreneurs with their ownofficesin Belval and allows them to benefit from the University's state-of-the-art facilities.
Furthermore, the Incubator'smentoring serviceoffers tailor-made support to ambitious start-ups irrespective of the stage of the project. This support is provided by leading experts from the Luxembourg start-up ecosystem.
HIVE magazine
The Incubator of the University of Luxembourg and the Entrepreneurship Programme together form theHIVEteam. In thismagazine, you can find out more about the events, initiatives and courses organised by the Entrepreneurship Programme, as well as some of the start-ups of the Incubator of the University of Luxembourg.
The Story of Magrid - Magrid Learning Solution (Video/Audio YouTube)
Magrid, an inclusive educational programme incubated at the University of Luxembourg
Tahereh Pazouki created theMagrid Learning Solutionin the incubator at the University of Luxembourg duringher PhD. It began as a spin-off, now it's a start-up. It is known across the globe and has won several awards. Don't miss thisinterviewwith its founder, Tahereh Pazouki.
Looking for ideas
Ideas are the basis of any project. However, it is necessary to create a suitable environment for them to flourish and to take shape. Two connected academic events highlight this approach:My Big Ideaand theIdeation Camp.
My Big Ideais acompetitionthat encourages students to develop their unique business ideas and then take them to the next level - the Ideation Camp. In order to participate in the My Big Idea competition, students or researchers from the university must submit their idea with at least one teammate, following the completion of a training course consisting of five workshops. For all those people who have an idea but no teammate or don't have an idea but want to participate in the competition, the university organises theCo-Founders Night. During these evenings, successful entrepreneurs from the Luxembourg ecosystem share their inspiring stories and offer valuable advice on how to embark on an entrepreneurial journey. Make a note in your diary - the event takes place every Thursday night in October!
Ideation Campis anintensive four-day practical courseattended by the teams selected during the My Big Idea competition. The teams receive support frommentorsfrom the Luxembourg entrepreneurial ecosystem as well as experts from the various fields of industry. On the last day, the ideas are presented toa versatile jurycomposed of members of the Rectorate, investors and entrepreneurs.
Ideation Camp – Meet the students (Video/Audio YouTube)
Ideation Camp – Meet the mentors (Video/Audio YouTube)
Ideation Camp 10
The10th edition of the Ideation Camptook place in November 2022. At the opening ceremony, 13 teams presented their ideas to the audience. At the end of the course, only seven teams were shortlisted to showcase their projects on the closing day.
TheE-mpact Pharmateam won this edition of the competition. The team is composed of four university students: Queen Lenya (Master in Entrepreneurship and Innovation), Naghmeh Rahimi (Master in Civil Engineering), Dilmurat Nurakhmetov (Master in Finance), and Utkirbek Ruzmatov (Master in Finance). E-mpact Pharma is developingan online platform where medicines can be easily exchanged between pharmacies, wholesale pharmaceutical distributors and the public. Their aim is tolimit the number of expired or unused medicinesthat end up in the ecosystem as well asmaking medicines more accessible at a lower cost. The team was awarded 10,000 euros in project funding which they will now invest to achieve their goal.
Last update02.10.2024
For more information
Education in the 21st century (I)
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/universities.html
Higher education institutions
Would you like to study in a multicultural  and multilingual country in the heart of Europe? The University of Luxembourg, known the world over for its multilingualism, its international outlook and its research programmes, welcomes a good number of students both from the Grand Duchy and abroad. In addition, accredited private foreign higher education institutions offer a wide range of courses and degrees for all needs. Not only is there a diverse selection  of higher education institutions in the country, but the cultural and social environment will make you enjoy your student life to the fullest.
The University of Luxembourg
The University' s teaching featuresthe availability of an abundance of high-qualityprogrammes. Welcome to the rooms of theUniversity of Luxembourg. Created in 2003, it is the only public university in the Grand Duchy. It consists of three faculties:
By participating in the  U-Multirank, Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) andTimes Higher Education (THE)rankings, where it obtains excellent scores in terms of international prospects and ranks 25th in the Young Universities Ranking of universities under 50, the University of Luxembourg has made its reputation.
3 interdisciplinary centres
The university also offers three interdisciplinary centres:
A European university
The University of Luxembourgis European through and through: located at the heart of the European Union, it is by nature multilingual and international (50% of students are from outside  the Grand Duchy). The programmes are eitherbi- or trilingual(French, German, English) or entirely held in English. Moreover, some bachelor and master programmes are bi- or even tri-national, involving neighbouring countries.
The popularity of the fledgling university is based onresearch- especially in its priority research areas of materials science, computer science and computer security, European and international law, finance and financial innovation, education and digital and contemporary history. The transdisciplinary themes of health and systems biomedicine as well as data modelling and simulation are also specialities of the university. Moreover,close collaboration with the country's financial institutionsand companies enables students to immerse themselves in the professional sector from the very beginning of their studies.
Foreign and private higher education institutions
Apart from the University of Luxembourg, there are alsoprivate foreign specialised higher education institutionsin the country. Here is the list of institutionsaccredited by the Ministry of Higher Education and Research  (awarding national degrees);
Institutions awarding foreign diplomas
BTS - higher technician certificates
It should also be noted that there are shorthigher education courses, the  BTS(brevets de technicien supérieur), offered by public high schools (duration between 2 and 3 years, 120 to 180 ECTS credits). The BTS are primarily aimed at young people who want to obtain higher level professional qualifications in a given speciality in order to be better prepared for the labour market. You can find the complete offer of the BTS atwww.bts.lu.
Here are some examples:
Last update10.03.2025
For more information
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
Student accommodation
Student life in Luxembourg: the essentials
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/lifelong-learning.html
Lifelong Learning
To address the needs of employers and employees in the face of the transformation  of today's working world, Luxembourg offers a wide range of vocational training aimed at young people and adults alike (employees  or jobseekers) in order to support them professionally,  the goal being to acquire a certified qualification.
Initial training and lifelong learning
Vocational training covers a wide range of training courses focusing on employment situations. It covers various areas:
Initial training
Initial training takes place in the context  oftechnical secondary educationin  Luxembourg. However, there is aNational School for Adultsfor all those between 16 and 30 years of age who have not completed their initial studies or training. It gives them a new chance to succeed and the opportunity to acquire a recognized certification or a national diploma.
Lifelong learning
Manager or employee? Whichever way: public lifelong learning allows anyone to obtain a diploma, complement or improve their knowledge and skills, change career path or adapt to the challenges that digitalisation brings about.
LLC: Obtaining a diploma through continuing education
Have your experience recognised
In the context of the recognition of acquired competences,the validation of prior learningenables a wide variety of competences acquired throughout life in different contexts, including education and work, to be assessed and recognised. There are a variety of diplomas:
The certification obtained may give access to a higher level of education and/or help to find a new job or progress in one's current career.
Training aid measures
In Luxembourg,individualswho wish to participate in continuing education can benefitfrom a number of financial incentives.These takethe form of special paid leave(individual training leave, language leave), measures affecting working time (unpaid leave for training) or other schemes, such as European grants.
In terms of  financial aidsforbusinesses, the Luxembourg government supports the training of businesses byco-funding training, offering financial aid worth 15% (taxable) of the  annual training investment. Financial aid is granted through a co-funding request.
Another type of aid  consists ofsubsidies for Luxembourgish coursesthat are aimed at better integrating foreigners in businesses by funding Luxembourgish courses.
In  addition,the ADEM(Luxembourg's employment portal) can  cover a part of training fees for a professional projectfor registered jobseekers.
Last update28.08.2025
For more information
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
Higher education institutions
Recognition of foreign school and higher education diplomas
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/student-accommodation.html
Student accommodation
That's it, you have made the decision to study in Luxembourg but you don't have a home yet. So it must be said that the game is not yet won, because it should be known that one of the greatest challenges for future students in Luxembourg is to find accommodation.
Go through the university first
It doesn't matter if you prefer to live in student halls, shared flats or  private accommodation,in Luxembourg there are options for everyone. But, in general, the best way to find student accommodation is to go through the university, as it rents university residences or single-family homes for students to private owners to make them available to students.
The university currently has 36 residences located in the centre and south of the Grand Duchy.  This offer is constantly being expanded to allow students as many options as possible. It is important to know that there is a limited amount of accommodation places and hall residency is not automatically granted. A small but important detail: it is necessary to act quickly, because the distribution of rooms is done in several waves.
This is why one hasto fillout theonline application for accommodationas early as possible. Theaccommodation typesvary in size and price.  The  Students' Department ('Service des études et de la vie étudiante', SEVE) at the University of Luxembourg accompanies students from their enrolment to their graduation day, and even beyond.
Making the right choice
Choosingthe right accommodation is one of the most important decisions for students tomake, as the rent is a major part of the budget. That is why the universities and the Luxembourgish authorities make considerable efforts to set up a range of attractive andaffordable accommodation offers that meet the needs of every type of student.A number of criteria play an important role, such asprice, location of the apartment,sizeorequipmentincluded. Often located in the middle of residential areas, housing not only offersgood living and working conditions, but also offers the opportunity to get to know the country better and creates many opportunities forintercultural encounters. You can find additional information on student living costs in theStudent Life section.
Other types of accommodation
Apart from student halls, students can also renta private flat. In addition to the University of Luxembourg,there are many private and international universitiesin Luxembourg. These universities use different means to help their students find accommodation. Some foreign students, as for  example those attendingthe Miami University Dolibois European Center, can chose to live with a local host familyfor the timeof their stay in Luxembourg. You can find further information on the sites of the respective universities.
It is also possibleto find a shared room.There is something for everytasteandbudget. Facebook groups such asColocation Luxembourg,Colocation Luxembourg / WG Lëtzebuerggive you more information about colocation in Luxembourg.
Last update30.10.2024
For more information
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
Student life in Luxembourg: the essentials
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/student-life-luxembourg.html
Student life in Luxembourg: the essentials
Small but popular, Luxembourg is located in the heart of Europe and the Greater Region, and it continues to welcome more and more students from all over the world. To help you find your way around the country, here are some useful tips that will serve you well as a student in the Grand Duchy.
Transportation and travel
There's no need to worry about being caught by a ticket inspector, because since 2020all public transport is freein Luxembourg!
Thebus and train network covers the wholecountry. Moreover,special services are provided at night and for major events.Don't forget, thetram is the best way to commute between the southern districts of Luxembourg City and Kirchberg. Over the coming years, the network will be developed further and new routes will be put into service.
Furthermore, the Grand Duchy currently has a network of600 km ofcycle paths, connecting different regions of the country and thus facilitating soft mobility. Bike rental services are available throughout the country.
Beyond the borders, international networks are also well developed. Luxembourg is located in the heart of the European Union and the Greater Region and, as such,neighbouring countriesare easily and quickly accessible via public transport or by car.
And what about destinations further afield? Theairportsof Luxembourg, Frankfurt, Frankfurt-Hahn, Charleroi, Lorraine and Saarbrücken are all nearby.
Mobility at your fingertips
TheMobiliteit.luapp (App StoreorGoogle Play Store) is free and allows you to plan your journeys. All means of transport are included in the app.
Cost of living and housing
It is difficult to provide an exact estimate of the average living costs of a student, as this depends very much on personal tastes, needs and circumstances. However, you can find an approximate estimation of average costs per person per month below, gathered from information available on theExpatistananduni.luwebsites:
Housing in university accommodation
EUR 450 per month (minimum)
Phone bill
EUR 40 per month
Internet (private housing)
EUR 52 per month
Supermarket
EUR 150 to 220 per month
Nightlife, restaurants, culture
EUR 120 to 150 per month
Fitness
EUR 20 to 48 per month
Hygiene and health
EUR 30 to 50 per month
School supplies (books, photocopies, etc.)
EUR 30 per month
Miscellaneous
EUR 80 to 100 per month
With regard to accommodation, the easiest thing to do is to contact theUniversity of Luxembourg. However, there are other ways to find accommodation in the Grand Duchy. Renting a flat on the open market is an option, as is sharing a flat. You can find more information on the different types of student accommodation in Luxembourg in the sectionStudent accommodation.
Culture and nightlife
Is Luxembourg a sleepy province? Far from it! From Michael Jackson to Måneskin, the big stars have proven otherwise!
Parties and weekend outings are part of student life for most students. They allow young people to get together and socialise, as well as discover the cultural and social life of their new city of residence.There are wide range of options in the Grand Duchy.
Theatres,concert hallsand cultural centres offer abroad and affordable programmeofcultural eventsto suit all tastes. Even during the summer holidays, a jam-packed programme ofoutdoor festivals and concertsattracts a diverse audience.
If you're looking for a party at the weekend or after-uninightlife, manycafes, bars, terraces and clubs are dotted across Luxembourg cityin a wide range ofdistricts,such as theAlstad(old town), the Grund, Clausen and Hollerich.
Esch-sur-Alzette, close to the Belval campus, is also becoming more popular and cosmopolitan. In the city centre, a variety of bars can be found, theKulturfabrikhosts concerts and theatre and theRockhal, the biggest concert venue in the country, regularly welcomes international superstars.
Furthermore,most of themuseumsin Luxembourg are freefor young people up to 21 years of age and a large number of museums also offer discounts for students up to 26 years of age. To take advantage of this offer, you just need to show your student card.
For film buffs, the Grand Duchy has a significant number ofcinemas spread across the country. These include the Cinémathèque de la Ville de Luxembourg or theKinepoliscinema complex in Limpertsberg and Kirchberg, the Kinepolis Belval cinema in Esch-Belval and theCinémaScalain Diekirch.
The Kinepolis Student Card is free and offers students a discount of up to 20% on cinema tickets and certain drinks and snacks.
Echo.lu: a list of all the events taking place in the country
Don't miss any of the events in Luxembourg!Echo.luis the leading event agenda and is also available onFacebookandInstagram.
Leisure and student associations
The University of Luxembourgoffers free sports activities, but students also have theoption to join one of the many sports clubs in Luxembourg.To join your new team, just consult the "clubs" section of the website of the relevant federation. From football, basketball and volleyball, as well as tennis, martial arts and swimming and gymnastics, dance and climbing, there is something suit everyone.
If you want to expand your social circle, simplybecome a member of a student associationsuch as theACEL, ALUC orany association officially recognised by the University of Luxembourgwhich organises events and different activities on a regular basis. You will get to meet students from other faculties and from different countries.
There's no shortage of opportunities to help you make the most of student life in Luxembourg!
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Higher education institutions
Student accommodation
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/financial-aid-students.html
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
As a student, how to finance your studies is something you have to think about at all stages of your academic journey. The challenge of paying tuition fees and accommodation costs can be particularly daunting. In this article, you will find out more about the different forms of financial aid available to help you overcome these hurdles and start the semester worry-free.
State financial aid for students
The Ministry of Research and Higher Education offersstate financial aid (AideFi) for students. Students can apply for AideFi online via theMyGuichet portalonce per semester before the corresponding deadlines. TheAideFisupport packageconsists of four parts and allows students to apply for botha grant and a loan, depending on their needs. With these tools, you can find out whether you areeligible forAideFiandhow muchyou might be entitled to.
Important: International students should apply for educational funding in their home country first. The outcome of this application will determine whether they can apply forAideFi.
Financial support from the University
For University of Luxembourg students, various forms of financial support are available from the University itself. These include bothgeneral and faculty-specific scholarshipsfor outstanding students. There is also astudent hardship fundto help students who are experiencing financial difficulties.
Erasmus+
Through the European Union'sErasmus+programme, University of Luxembourg students have the opportunity to participate in astudy or internship programme in Europe or other countriesfor up to 12 months. If you have any questions about Erasmus+ and the partner universities, please ask your university directly.
Research grants and mobility support
Financial support is also available for researchers. TheAFR programme(Aides à la Formation Recherche) of the National Research Fund (FNR)supports researchers wanting to pursue a PhD in Luxembourg or abroad. In addition, theAFR bilateral programmeprovidesfunding for research training of doctoral and postdoctoral candidates in Luxembourg and partner countries.
Furthermore,mobility scholarshipsare available for researchers who work in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg or conduct research abroad:
Private grants
In addition,private grantsare available for students from the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,depending on the chosen study subject and the student's academic performance:
Other support measures
Financial support is also available from local authorities for students residing in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.For more information, please contact your local municipality.
Last update10.03.2025
For more information
Higher education institutions
Student accommodation
Student life in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/recognition-diplomas.html
Recognition of foreign school and higher education diplomas
Luxembourg is a country with a large foreign population. Out of a registered population of 660,809 in 2023, a total of 313,400 are foreigners, and many need to take steps to ensure that their studies and qualifications are recognised so that they can continue with education and training or practise certain professions. We outline the various possible scenarios so that you know which government body to contact.
Primary and secondary studies
Diplomas, certificates, school reports and other qualifications obtained abroad at primary and secondary schools (general or vocational) can be recognised asequivalent qualificationsin some conditions.
For this level of study, there arethree possible options:
1. Applying for recognition of the level of primary and secondary education without achieving a final diploma
This applies to children subject to compulsory education who wish to join the Luxembourg schooling system and for adults wishing to return to a course of study in Luxembourg.
Further details about the procedure are available atguichet.lu.
2. Applying for recognition of a baccalaureate/Matura or other secondary education diploma
The conditions for the recognition of equivalence vary depending on the country that issued the diploma and whether it is a signatory to the Paris or Lisbon Conventions on the mutual recognition of diplomas or a third country that has not signed these conventions. The International Baccalaureate has specific conditions related to the criteria set by the International Baccalaureate Organisation.
Further details about the procedure are available atguichet.lu.
3. Applying for recognition of the level of studies, the equivalence of diplomas and the equivalence of professional qualifications
This applies to some commercial and liberal professions, crafts and trades, and health and socio-educational professions, which may require a licence to practise.
The conditions for the recognition of equivalence depend on the country that issued the qualification and whether or not it is an EU Member State.
Further details about the procedure are available atguichet.lu.
Where to submit applications regarding primary and secondary studies:
The Ministry of Education, Children and Youth deals with the recognition of equivalence for primary and secondary education. Applications regarding these levels of study should be sent to theService de la reconnaissance des diplômes(Department for the Recognition of Diplomas).
Ministry of Education, Children and Youth
Service de la reconnaissance des diplômes
29, rue Aldringen. L-1118 Luxembourg
Postal address: L-2926 Luxembourg
Tel.: +352 274-85910
Email:reconnaissance@men.lu
Applications can be submitted by post, by email or via myguichet.lu.
Recognition is awarded on a case-by-case basis, except for nursing and midwifery diplomas obtained in an European Union Member State: in this case, since the minimum training requirements have been harmonised at European Union level, equivalence is recognised automatically.
Languages of documents and sworn translations
Copies of supporting documents in applications for the recognition of studies or diplomas must be either in one of the three official languages of Luxembourg –French, Luxembourgish or German– or inEnglish. If the documents are not in these languages, they must betranslatedinto one of these languages by asworn translator in Luxembourg. TheMinistry of Justice keeps an up-to-datelistof sworn translators.
Certified copies of documents issued outside the European Union
Copies ofsupporting documentsin applications for the recognition of studies or diplomasissued by countries outside the European Union must be certified as true copies of the original by a competent authority. Communal administrations, embassies and consulates usually offer this service.
Higher education
Introductory note: some professions require a licence to practise even for those who received their qualifications in Luxembourg. Here we will only look at the procedures for diplomas awarded outside Luxembourg.
For this level of study, there arethree possible options:
1. Academic recognition
This procedure confers theright to hold an academic titleand indicates thecorresponding level in the Luxembourg Qualifications Framework. It involvesregistering the qualification in the Register of formal higher education qualifications(registre des titres de formation, section de l'enseignement supérieur). Academic recognition does not include recognition of the content of studies andtherefore does not confer the right to exercise a regulated profession.
The conditions required for academic recognition depend on the country where the diploma was awarded: Belgium and the Netherlands (Benelux diplomasare automatically recognised) ora non-Benelux country(holders must apply to register their qualification in the Register of formal higher education qualifications).
Details about the supporting documents to be included in applications and the fees required are available atguichet.lu.
Where to submit applications regarding academic recognition:
Ministry of Research and Higher Education
Service Registre des titres
18-20, montée de la Pétrusse. L-2327 Luxembourg
Postal address: B.P. L-2915
Tel.: +352 274-86619
Email:registre@mesr.etat.lu
Applications can be submitted by post or via myguichet.lu.
2. Professional recognition
The sole aim of this procedure is to provideaccess to a regulated profession. Itdoes not confer the right to use an academic titleanddoes not indicate the corresponding level in the Luxembourg Qualifications Framework. Before applying for professional recognition it is often necessary to obtain a business permit (autorisation d'établissement) or a work permit (autorisation d'exercer une activité professionnelle).
The professions for which professional recognition is required can be found here:
Details about the supporting documents to be included in applications and the fees required are available on theMinistry of Research and Higher Education.
Where to submit applications related to professional recognition:
Ministry of Research and Higher Education
Service Reconnaissance des qualifications professionnelles
18-20, montée de la Pétrusse. L-2327 Luxembourg
Postal address: B.P. L-2915
Tel.: +352 274-86619
Email:rqp@mesr.etat.lu
Applications can be submitted by post or via myguichet.lu.
3. Official recognition (homologation) of law degrees
Homologationis the official recognition of aforeign degree in law. This is still required foradmission to the regulated profession of lawyerand for access tocomplementary courses in Luxembourg law (cours complémentaires en droit luxembourgeois– CCDL). The process only applies for this purpose.
Details about the supporting documents to be included in applications and the fees required can be found on the website of theMinistry of Research and Higher Education, which processes all applications.
Exception: holders of theright to practisethe profession of lawyer inanother European Union Member Stateare generally exempted from thehomologationprocedure and may apply directly to the Ministry of Justice for authorisation to practise as a lawyer in Luxembourg.
Where to submit applications for thehomologationof law degrees:
Ministry of Research and Higher Education
18-20, montée de la Pétrusse. L-2327 Luxembourg
Postal address: B.P. L-2915
Tel.: +352 274-86619
Email:homologation@mesr.etat.lu
Applications must be submitted by post or by email.
Accreditation of prior experiential learning
Accreditation of prior experiential learning (validation des acquis de l'expérience– VAE) is a process for theformal recognition of professional or personal skills for the purposes of obtaining a qualification. Qualifications obtained through accreditation of prior experiential learning are as valid as those obtained through initial education.
Accreditation of prior experiential learning can be requested for three levels of education:
1. Secondary education
Accreditation of prior experiential learning can offer access to certificates and diplomas for vocational training, general secondary education or the master craftsman's certificate. Details are available onguichet.luand on the website of theMinistry of Education, Children and Youth.
Where to submit applications related to the accreditation of prior experiential learning for secondary education:
Ministry of Education, Children and Youth
Validation des acquis de l'expérience
29, rue Aldringen. L-2926 Luxembourg
Tel.: +352 247-85912 / -65253 / -85993
Email:vae@men.lu
Applications can be submitted by post or via myguichet.lu.
2. Higher education
In the field of higher education,the process for the accreditation of prior experiential learning is decentralised. Each institution sets its own administrative procedures for applicants.
In Luxembourg, accreditation of prior experiential learning may apply especially to:
Details about conditions, deadlines,supporting documentsand contact organisations are available atguichet.lu.
3. Continuous vocational training
Anyone interested in the accreditation of prior experiential learning forcontinuing education certificates obtained through evening classesshould apply to theLuxembourg Lifelong Learning Centerrun by the Chamber of Employees.
Details about conditions, deadlines, fees and supporting documents can be found atguichet.lu.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Student life in Luxembourg: the essentials
Higher education institutions
Lifelong Learning
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg/jobs-internships-for-pupils-students.html
Jobs and internships for pupils and students
Whether you're a school pupil or a student, jobs and internships give you the chance to gain some initial work experience and earn a bit of money. At the same time, you'll develop essential skills for your future career and can explore which profession might be best suited to you. Read on to find out what types of internships and jobs are available and how to successfully land them.
Jobs for pupils and students
Besides enabling you to gain valuable experience and earn some cash, a job can also enhance your CV. There are two main types:
Minimum wage for pupils and students (student work contract)
Minimum wage for pupils and students (fixed-term employment contract)
Three keys to success
Master these three elements toincrease your chances of landinga job or internship:
Internships
Internshipsallow you to explore the working world and gain real work experience. Again, there are two types:
Compensation for a voluntary internship
Where and how can I find a job or internship?
There are various ways to explore job or internship opportunities:
1) Online job boardsoffer a comprehensive range of listings that you can browse from the comfort of your home. Here are some websites to kickstart your search:
2) Ask your friends and family members. Your close connections can be a great resource when searching for a job or internship, as they might know someone with a suitable position.
3) Send out speculative applicationsdirectly tocompaniesyou'd like to work for. This shows that you are proactive and keen.
4) Many schools and universitiesmaintain partnerships with companies that offer internships. Enquire with your school oruniversitydirectly.
5) Job fairsgive you the chance to find out about different companies and ask questions in person. Here are some job fairs in Luxembourg:
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
School Leave
Financial aids for students
Entrepreneurial education
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/competitiveness/house-of-training-tailor-made-training.html
House of Training: tailor-made training
Since its creation in 2015, House of Training (HOT) has been offering specialised training programmes, designed in collaboration with experts, to meet the needs of businesses and professionals in Luxembourg.
Ten years on, the institute has become a benchmark in the training landscape and a trusted partner for professionals, businesses and institutions. In a decade, it has recorded more than 250,000 registrations and organisedmore than 20,000 training sessions. These sessions have enabled it to support more than 13,000 businesses since 2015.
'The Future is Made of Skills'- this is the new brand signature of theHouse of Training, a powerful message that accompanies the celebration of its 10th anniversary this year. On the occasion of its anniversary, the House of Training reaffirms its mission and chooses to make curiosity the key value of its new campaign. Curiosity is the essential driver for developing new skills.
Beyond the figures and trends, there is everyday life, shaped by those who drive the House of Training forward, includingits director Muriel Morbé.In an interview, she discusses the priorities, challenges and values of the House of Training.
TheHouse of Training, a foundation created in 2015 by theChamber of Commerceand theABBL, is a key player in continuing professional development in Luxembourg. Its mission is to strengthen the skills of businesses and individuals in order to support the country's competitiveness and attractiveness. With a pragmatic approach based on the principle that professionals train other professionals, it supports managers in setting up, taking over and running businesses, while offering employees opportunities for development and advancement. Driven by values of collaboration, agility, respect, excellence and impact, the House of Training delivers more than 54,000 man-days of training each year through 1,400 modules, mobilising 800 experts and 60 partnerships. Its training courses, available in four languages, are rooted in the economic and sectoral reality of Luxembourg, guaranteeing a concrete impact on performance and employability.
The House of Training celebrated its 10th anniversary on 15 October 2025. This was also an opportunity to launch a new slogan: "The Future is Made of Skills". What message do you want to convey with this phrase?
This slogan reflects a simple conviction: Luxembourg's future will be built on skills. Technological, environmental and societal transitions are profoundly transforming the world of work. According to a recent study conducted by Implement Consulting Group (The Economic Opportunity of Generative AI in Luxembourg), 72% of jobs in Luxembourg will see their functions evolve with artificial intelligence, while only 6% are actually at risk of disappearing. This observation perfectly illustrates the shift from a job-based approach to a skills-based approach: jobs are changing, but it is skills that are transforming, combining and adapting. 'The Future is Made of Skills' reminds us that skills development is the key to supporting these transitions and collectively preparing for the future.
If you had to sum up these ten years in three words, which would you choose and why?
Agility, collaboration and impact, which are part of our values
What were the main challenges when the House of Training was created in 2015?
At the outset, it was a question of bringing together three organisations: IFBL (Institut de Formation Bancaire Luxembourg), LSC (Luxembourg School for Commerce) and ATTF (Agence de Transfert de Technologie Financière) – three entities with complementary expertise, but with different corporate cultures and operating methods. We had to get to know each other, learn to work together, understand each other and build a common approach capable of meeting the needs of a variety of sectors and diverse audiences. This integration process was a real lesson in collaboration and agility, but also in respect, as we had to recognise the value and uniqueness of each culture before we could build a shared identity. It is this combination of expertise, fuelled by the desire to have a lasting impact on skills development in Luxembourg, that has shaped the DNA of the House of Training. Ten years on, this collective adventure has become a real success story.
How does the House of Training of today differ from that of ten years ago?
In ten years, our offering has grown and undergone a profound transformation. We have gone from 800 training courses in 2015 to more than 1,470 in 2025, supported by a team that has also grown from 36 to 50 employees. This development has been accompanied by a marked expansion of our cross-functional offering and personal development courses, which now play an essential role in addressing human, managerial and organisational challenges.
We have also observed a change in the support needs of companies and a growing demand for tailor-made training courses adapted to their contexts, priorities and transitions. This evolution has led us to develop our methods and practices to strengthen our role as a development partner. We have also structured our offering around professional profiles – 71 today – organised into clearly defined skill sets, in order to facilitate career paths and professional mobility.
And since 2025, the launch of Higher Education has marked a new stage: the academic recognition of continuing education as a lever for career advancement. The COVID years have also been a turning point: they have accelerated the diversification of learning methods, with the development of e-learning and blended learning, which offer greater flexibility while preserving the richness of face-to-face learning, which is still preferred for its benefits in terms of exchange and practical application. Ten years after its creation, the House of Training remains fully aligned with its mission: to identify needs, support change and anticipate the skills of tomorrow through tailored training programmes. The recent survey of companies and the establishment of advisory committees are proof of this: our development continues to be guided by listening, dialogue and a desire to act in line with market realities.
In the next ten years, what would you like to do differently from what you did in the first decade of the House of Training?
Above all, we want to continue what we have started: remain agile, listen to the market and pay attention to the evolution of skills in a world in constant transition. At the same time, we want to raise awareness among companies of continuing education as a strategic investment. According to a study published in the Chamber of Commerce's Economic Barometer in 2024, 55% of companies identify the lack of skilled labour as their main obstacle to development, and 27% believe that the training on offer is not yet fully adapted to their needs.
Our ambition in the coming years is to support organisations in measuring the impact of their training initiatives so that they can use them as a real lever for competitiveness, employability and talent attraction. We also want to stimulate curiosity and a desire to learn, as these are the qualities that fuel agility and enable us to anticipate future changes. This approach will be based on enhanced dialogue with our partners and an increasingly detailed understanding of market needs, in order to develop the skills that the Luxembourg economy will need tomorrow.
Muriel Morbé, Director of the House of Training
Which sectors currently make the most use of your training courses?
Nearly a quarter of our enrolments come from the financial sector, a long-standing area of expertise for the House of Training, developed in close collaboration with the ABBL.
But our work extends far beyond that. We also support the commerce, industry, transport, real estate, hospitality, architecture and engineering, and business services sectors. Our offering is both sector-specific, co-developed with our professional partners to meet the specific needs of each field, and cross- order to address the cross-cutting skills essential to all organisations. These training courses cover, for example, law, taxation, marketing, human resources, office automation and occupational health and safety; but also entrepreneurship and business organisation, two key levers for strengthening the competitiveness and resilience of SMEs. This balanced approach allows us to combine technical expertise and a global vision in the service of competitiveness and sustainable development of the Luxembourg economy.
Have you noticed any changes in the profile of learners (age, roles, companies, languages)?
When it was first established, the House of Training mainly covered regulatory training, whether in the financial sector or training for entry into the profession. Over time, the profile of our learners has diversified and broadened, reflecting the evolution of our offering. Today, we train participants from all economic sectors, reflecting the variety of skills needs in Luxembourg. The development of Higher Education, launched in 2025, now attracts an audience composed mainly of executives and managers who wish to enhance their experience, strengthen their knowledge and obtain academic recognition of their skills. At the same time, our collaboration with ADEM is aimed more at professionals who are retraining or seeking a new career balance. It actively contributes to transition and return-to-work pathways, promoting sustainable inclusion in the labour market. Our courses are offered in French, English and German to reflect the multicultural and multilingual reality of Luxembourg and to ensure equitable access to skills development for all.
Is artificial intelligence already influencing your programmes? If so, in what way?
Yes, and in a very concrete way. Artificial intelligence is no longer a separate subject; it now cuts across all professions. According to the recent study mentioned above, conducted by Implement Consulting Group (The Economic Opportunity of Generative AI in Luxembourg), 65% of executives believe that AI will have a significant impact on their organisation within three to five years. At the same time, nearly one in two employees say they need to develop their AI skills. In response to this transformation, we have chosen to develop sector-specific specialisations that integrate AI: in finance, risk management, supply chain, commerce and sustainability. The aim is to support each sector in its own evolution, taking into account its operational, regulatory and human realities. AI is not approached as an end in itself, but as a lever for performance, innovation and informed decision-making in every professional field.
In your opinion, what skills will be most in demand in Luxembourg over the next five to ten years?
We recently asked our partners, trainers and companies this question, and two skills clearly stand out: adaptability and agility. In an environment where technological, regulatory and societal transformations are accelerating, these abilities to learn quickly, evolve and collaborate are becoming essential. They determine the success of all other skills, whether technical, digital or related to sustainability. The future will belong to professionals who are able to connect these dimensions, adjust to new contexts and turn change into opportunity. Jobs will evolve, but the ability to learn, connect issues and adapt will remain the most valuable skill.
Which phrase best sums up the philosophy of the House of Training?
Never stop learning. This phrase sums up our mindset: curiosity as a driving force, learning as a reflex. In a constantly changing world, the ability to learn, unlearn and relearn is becoming an essential skill. At the House of Training, we cultivate this curiosity, both in our learners and internally, because it paves the way for innovation, resilience and collective growth. But if I may, I would like to quote a second phrase that sums up the founding values of the House of Training
CAREforIMPACT
Collaboration, Agility, Respect, Excellence
What are the House of Training's priorities for the next ten years?
Our priorities are in line with our mission: to support companies in developing the skills of their employees in order to promote Luxembourg's competitiveness, sustainability and attractiveness. In the years to come, we want to strengthen our role as a strategic partner to organisations, helping them to identify their needs, anticipate changes in their business lines and deploy training solutions tailored to their transitions, whether technological, organisational or human. This support work is all the more necessary given that today, 36% of companies never use continuing education and only 40% use it on an ad hoc basis (2024 Economic Barometer).There is therefore still great potential for developing a genuine culture of lifelong learning by removing barriers related to time, cost and language. Another major priority will be the digitalisation of our services and offerings. This should improve access to training, streamline the learner experience and enable us to use data to better understand and anticipate skills needs. In short, our ambition is clear: to provide long-term support to companies and develop our tools and practices to keep pace with market changes and the skills of tomorrow.
Last update24.03.2026
For more information
Portrait of the Luxembourg economy
Foreign Trade
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/competitiveness/sustainability-framework.html
Sustainability Bond Framework
On 2 September 2020, Luxembourg launched its Sustainability Bond Framework, which meets the International Capital Markets Association (ICMA) Green, Social and Sustainability Bonds principles, the standard in the field. Just a few days later, the country also issued the first European sovereign sustainability bond over €1.5 billion, which will contribute towards financing and refinancing sustainable projects.
The first European framework for sustainability bonds
The launch of the framework, whichenables the issuance of green, social or sustainability bonds(i.e. combining green and social aspects), is in line with the efforts undertaken by Luxembourg’s government over the last years in the field of sustainable finance. The framework has been laid out so as tomeet the criteria for sustainable and green bonds defined by theInternational Capital Markets Association’s(ICMA) Green, Social and Sustainability Bonds principles. Furthermore, they are already fully in line with the recommendations of the final report of the Technical Expert Group (TEG) on the Taxonomy of the European Union. In the same spirit, the framework has been designed to comply with the draft European Green Bonds Standard (EU GBS).
In other words,Luxembourg is ensuring that all bonds issued within this framework enjoy international recognition as green, social or sustainable bonds.
So, what does is the framework about?
Proceeds from the bonds issued through this frameworkcan only be used to finance or refinance eligible expenditure. More specifically, this covers expenditure in the following green and social categories:
Thus, the framework will provide anobjective and transparent toolto determine the sustainability of the country's public investments.
Your Partners
It also serves as animportant tool to achieve the country’s commitments under the Paris Climate Convention and the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals(SDG). The framework is also aligned with Luxembourg's two flagship sustainable strategies, theNational Plan for Sustainable Development(Plan national pour un développement durable, PNDD) and theIntegrated National Energy and Climate Plan(Plan national intégré en matière d’énergie et de climat, PNEC).
This framework cementsLuxembourg’s position and reputation as a pioneer in green and sustainable investments. Did you know for instance, that theworld’s leading stock exchange dealing exclusively in green bonds inLuxembourg Green Exchange(LGX), with over €60 billions worth of green bonds? Indeed, LGX is not just the biggest, but it was also the first platform entirely dedicated to green, social and sustainable financial instruments.
Europe's first Sovereign Sustainability Bond
In a follow-up move to the publication of the framework,Luxembourg also issued Europe’s first sovereign sustainability bond. This €1.5 billion bond will contribute to finance and refinance sustainable projects, i.e. of a social and green nature. With a 12-year maturity, the bond bears a negative interest rate of -0.123%.
And investors were obviously pleased with this bond, asdemand quickly exceeded the initial offer– one more proof that markets continue to place a lot of trust in the stability of Luxembourg’s economy.
Last update20.01.2025
For more information
Green Finance
Focus on renewable energies
The circular economy – the circulation of information is also vital
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/competitiveness/silk-road-luxembourg-chengdu.html
The new Silk Road leads to the Grand Duchy
The Grand Duchy's logistics sector has just gained an extremely important partner: the Chinese city of Chengdu, capital of Szechuan province in the centre of the People's Republic. From there, a reliable, top-quality rail link covering more than 10,000 kilometres makes it possible to carry goods from one side of the world to the other.
Looking for reliable partners
At first sight, the city of Chengdu has very little in common with the Grand Duchy. Chengdu is a city with a population of nearly 10 million in the midst of the world's most populous country, while the Grand Duchy, with its population of 600,000, is one of the smallest countries in Europe. Yet the two partners share a common interest – the transport of goods. Andboth are strategically placed in their respective regions: Chengdu in the centre of China, and the Grand Duchy at the heart of Europe.
This means  that, for Chengdu, theGrand Duchy is ideally placed to serve as a gateway to western and southern Europe.
What tipped the balance in the Grand Duchy's favour?
TheGrand Duchy has been a top-performing regional hubfor years. Apart from its key position in the centre of western Europe, the Grand Duchy has developed a full offer of logistics services, with the active participation of the State. The Grand Duchy has become an integrated platform, taking advantage of new infrastructures in Bettembourg-Dudelange and reliable connections throughout the region.
TheSingle Window for Logisticsis a one-stop shop for logistics and international trade in Luxembourg that provides services to all players in the sector.
CFL Cargo( conventional rail  freight) andCFL Multimodal(  containers)offer daily rail connections to the major hubs throughout the European Unionand Turkey as well as to the Baltic and North Sea ports, making the Grand Duchy the hinterland of the ports of Antwerp, Zeebrugge, Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Hamburg.
Nor should we forgetthe'rolling motorway'between  Luxembourg and Perpignan, offering improved transit times to the south of France.
A blooming partnership
At the same time,  adelegation recently travelled from the Grand Duchy to Chengduto  continue thenegotiations for setting up a partnership with Cargolux, the world's leading freight airline. Knowing that Cargolux will be choosing two new hubs before the end of 2020 for its activities in China, Chengdu expressed its interest in developing relations with the Grand Duchy.
Established relations
Logistics collaboration has very solid foundations.Financial relationshave been close for many years now. For example, the Grand Duchy is one of Europe's main centres for cross-border business in renminbi (currency code RMB) and an important centre for cross-border investment between China and Europe. Indeed 78% of European funds investing in mainland China are Luxembourgish.
In addition,seven major Chinese banks have opted for the Grand Duchyas the European hub for their activities.
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
Logistics
Portrait of the Luxembourg economy
Foreign Trade
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/competitiveness/portrait-luxembourg-economy.html
Portrait of the Luxembourg economy
Luxembourg's economy is one of the most dynamic in Europe and one of the most open in the world. In global rankings about territorial competitiveness, digitalisation and innovation, it regularly ranks in the top 10. Moreover, it is considered to be the economic powerhouse of the Greater Region, territory composed of regions from 4 countries. Even though its financial centre remains the economy's mainstay, much effort has gone into diversification. As a result, Luxembourg is today a logistics hub, as well as a leader in satellite technology and digitalisation. All of this is made possible day in day out by a motivated and productive international workforce.
Global economic performance
Luxembourg's reputation as a resilient and stable powerhouse precedes it. The country is not only aninternationally renowned financial centre, it is also regularly ranked in international benchmarks among thetop 10 best performing countries. Deeply embedded within the European Union, Luxembourg has established itself as one of the EU's best performing countries concerningterritorial competitiveness, digitalisation and innovation. This is showcased by itsgross domestic product (GDP) per capita, which is the highest in the worldaccording to the International Monetary Fund, as well as its AAA-rating, attributed regularly by all big rating agencies.
Thus,Standard&Poor's, Fitch, DBRS and Moody have all been attribution the coveted AAA-ratingto Luxembourg throughout economic crisis and uncertain times, expressing continuous trust in the country's ability to remain resilient in the face of a difficult international outlook. Other global benchmarks confirm these strengths (2021 rankings):
Among the strongpoints, these rankings include itseconomic and political stability, the workforce's productivity and expertise, its international openness, its digital infrastructure and competences, as well as its innovation-centered regulatory framework and R&D-friendly environment.
Weak point include comparatively high labour costs, fiscal competitiveness, a late development of egovernment and a comparatively low amount of economic diversification.
Overall, Luxembourg's economic strength resides foremost in itsstability, its international openness and its ability to absorb and rebound from macro-economic shocks and adapt to a changing environment.
From growing crops to growing entrepreneurship
Luxembourg's economy underwent massive changes in its past. The countryevolved from an agriculture and crafts-driven economy to an industrial powerhouse in the late 19th century, becoming home to theworld's leading steel producer in the mid-20th century. The steel industry's lasting impact can be admired in Luxembourg's southern region, called theMinett, which has become famous for its architecture and industrial relics.
The success of this sector alsodrove the country's economic development for a long time. However, after the first steel crisis in the 1970s, successive governments undertook efforts of economic diversification by creating a fiscally advantageous environment that soonmade Luxembourg one of the biggest financial centres in the world.
Main sectors of Luxembourg's economy
Today, thefinancial sector accounts for 25% of the country's GDP. Its outlook is staunchly international: Luxembourg provides anoperational hub for many international financial institutions. Its international and multilingual workforce runs cross-border activities such as private and corporate banking, fund administration and custody, wealth management and treasury services effectively. For many non-EU stakeholders, Luxembourg has come to be a key gateway to the EU, as they benefit from a direct access to the EU single market area.
In order toincrease the resilience of Luxembourg's economy, recent governments have also encouraged economicdiversification and transformationthrough a number of initiatives that are starting to bear fruit:
In general, Luxembourg remains aknowledge-driven economy, with the financial and R&D sectors making up most of its economic prowess. However, sectors developingcutting-edge technologies have been massively supportedin recent years, leading to a thriving ecosystem of businesses, investors and public stakeholders.
Over 150 years of immigration and integration
Abouthalf of Luxembourg's population does not have the Luxembourgish nationality, the result of one and a half centuries of immigration. Starting with Germans and Italians in the 19th century, wave after wave of people flocked to Luxembourg to find work. Today, the Portuguese and French communities make up the biggest part of the international community, which also includes large Anglo-American and Scandinavian communities.
Luxembourg's society has integrated these communities over time,creating a stable and amazing mix of nationalities and cultures on a small territorythat has not only driven its reputation as a welcoming country, but also driven its rise as an economic powerhouse.
A strong and multinational workforce
Luxembourg's international, multilingual and skilled workforce is the key to its economic success and resilience.
In total,47.2% (2021) of the resident population do not have the Luxembourgish nationality. This includes communities which have been associated with Luxembourg for a long time – i.e. French, German, Belgian, but also Portuguese and Italian communities – as well as expats who are working for international institutions or companies in the Grand Duchy. Moreover, the country welcomes close to200,000 cross-border employees every day– for a population approaching 640,000. In other words:Luxembourg has not just been the place where the Schengen Agreements were signed, it embodies its spirit.
Where people from many national and cultural backgrounds interact, communication is a key element to success. While Luxembourg is atrilingual country (Luxembourgish, French, German), many other languages are spoken on a daily basis. The large Portuguese and Italian communities are certainly contributing to the country's linguistic wealth, while English and French having become vehicular languages used to communicate every day. This is supported by Luxembourg's education system, which heavily relies on teaching German and French, but also gives students many opportunities to learn other languages.
It is thus without surprise, that a number of benchmarks regularly put Luxembourg among the top spots of their rankings, for instance the IMD World Talent Ranking or the INSEAD Global Talent Competitiveness Index.
Last update03.09.2024
For more information
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Your business in Luxembourg
Industry in Luxembourg: a sector on the move
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/competitiveness/foreign-trade.html
Foreign Trade
Luxembourg has established a name for itself as a dynamic and widely open economy. The Grand Duchy is part of the European Union and the Schengen area, and it has a strategic position in the heart of Europe. According to the Open Markets Index, Luxembourg has the most open economy in Europe and has a leading position globally.
A country exporting high-quality goods and services
At least65% of the goods and services 'made in Luxembourg' are exported. As an internationally oriented developed economy of services, Luxembourg experiences a substantial surplus on the services account, in particular as a result of its exports of financial services. This can be seen in the country's current account which, in 2018, had a 2.8 billion euros surplus.
Exported goods include manufactured metal products, machines, as well as transport material. A significant part of these goods is transported byCargolux, the largest air freight company in Europe, that is of Luxembourgish origin.
Relations based on trust
Did you know that Luxembourg has 359 km of borders, including 148 km with Belgium, 138 km with Germany and 73 km with France? When it comes to products, they are Luxembourg's three main trade partners. Over the years, Luxembourg broadened its trade relations outside of the European Union, in particular with the United States, Asian countries and the Middle East.
Your partners abroad
Whether you are a Luxembourgish business willing to develop an international project or a foreign business willing to expand in Luxembourg to access the European market,you couldn't dream of a better partner than Luxembourg's extensive diplomatic network.
Diplomatic and consular network
TheMinistry of Foreign and European Affairsis in charge of Luxembourg's diplomatic and consular network, which currently consists of 37 diplomatic and consular missions all over the world. Its 840 agents and 135 diplomats are at your service to advise and connect you, as well as to identify economic opportunities for you.
Luxembourg Trade and Investment Offices (LTIOs):
To contribute to the development of foreign trade, theLuxembourg Trade and Investinitiative of the Ministry of Economy offers support offices in high-potential markets, such as, in particular, the United States, Asia and the Middle East. In collaboration withLuxinnovation, the national innovation agency, the nine LTIOs can provide you with general and sectoral advice. Alongisde the diplomatic and consular network, they play the role of an intermediary between businesses and the authorities
Chamber of Commerce
The Luxembourg Chamber of Commerce has put in place economic advisers inLuxembourgish embassies inBerlin, Brussels and Paris, with a view to further strengthening foreign trade with our neighbouring countries.
How to set up a business in Luxembourg
Aimed at national and foreign entrepreneurs and investors, the brochure 'How to set up a business in Luxembourg - Factsheets' explains in a clear and concise manner, step by step, the main administrative and organisational procedures for setting up in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. The publication thus gives an overview of the most important procedures and regulations and provides useful information and contacts for (future) entrepreneurs.
Last update20.10.2025
For more information
Your business in Luxembourg
Key sectors
Innovation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/place-financiere-defis-numeriques-blockchain-cryptomonnaies-banques-digitales-fintech.html
How digital technologies are driving the financial centre
Financial centres have always had to deal with crises and upheavals. This instability has been particularly notable in recent decades as the global economy has been shaken by major crises including oil shocks, stock market crashes and the global financial crisis in the late 2000s. Now a new chapter is beginning, with the emergence of digital innovations that are creating new challenges and possibilities for financial districts.
The changes brought about by digital innovation are also affecting the Luxembourg financial centre. The centre is the backbone of the national economy, managing nearly €7,770 billion through investment funds domiciled in Luxembourg, whilethe banking sector holds approximately €1,000 billion of assets.The financial centre represents nearly a third of Luxembourg's GDP and contributes over 20% of tax revenues. It employs more than 26,000 people and is home to more than 120 banks.
In short,Luxembourg owes its wealth to a strong, dynamic financial sector, as confirmed by the Chamber of Commerce in itsEconomic Barometer survey for the second half of 2025. According to the survey, 89% of companies in the financial centre are confident for the future of the sector.
But this positive outlook does not mean that the sector can rest on its laurels, as significant challenges lie ahead. Digital innovations likebitcoin, the digital euro and digital-only banks are new realities that the financial centre has to grapple with.
In an interview,Jerry Grbic, CEOof theLuxembourg Bankers' Association (ABBL), tells us how Luxembourg is strengthening its position in this rapidly developing sector.
1. Do you see cryptocurrencies as an opportunity, a risk or both for the Luxembourg financial centre?
At the ABBL, we don't take a "pro-" or "anti-"cryptocurrency view, as the reality is that cryptocurrencies are here to stay.  The main challenge is to channel innovation so that it serves the real economy, businesses and citizens, while protecting the stability and reputation of the Luxembourg financial centre.
Cryptocurrencies clearly represent both an opportunity and a risk.The underlying technologies likeblockchainand tokenisation offer new possibilities, especially when it comes to streamlining payments, facilitating new financial activities and boosting Luxembourg's international attractiveness in a harmonised European framework. Yet these innovations come with very real risks, especially for investors but also in terms of financial crime and reputation – and the latter two points are extremely sensitive for an open, international financial centre like ours.
That is whya clear, proportionate regulatory framework, like MiCA [Markets in Crypto-Assets, a European Union regulation that creates a framework for digital assets like cryptocurrencies within the EU], is crucial.In this context, we expect to see a growing number ofstablecoinissuers applying for authorisation in Luxembourg.
In general, the future of digital currency will require a complementary approach between central bank digital currencies, regulated payment solutions and regulated uses of cryptocurrencies, with banks as guarantors of confidence and stability.
2. What opportunities does the introduction of the digital euro offer for Luxembourg's banks?
The digital euro represents a major step forward for the European financial ecosystem.The aim is to offer a secure, accessible public payment method that is suited to an increasingly digital economy. This goal is largely shared by the banking industry, as long as the digital euro offers real added value for customers and the economy, and as long as it is devised in close cooperation with private stakeholders.
For Luxembourg's banks, there are multiple challengesin terms of adapting payment infrastructures, implementation costs, and also maintaining their central role as financial intermediaries, especially with regard to deposits, financing the economy and building a relationship of trust with customers.
That is why the ABBL is calling for a pragmatic, proportionate and collaborative approach to ensure that the digital euro complements existing services, especially private payment solutions in Europe, while also supporting innovation and strengthening Luxembourg's competitiveness without weakening its banking model.
Artificial intelligence is gradually transforming the Luxembourg financial sector by improving operational efficiency, quality of service, risk management and profitability.
Jerry Grbic, CEO of the ABBL(Luxembourg Bankers' Association)
3. Are digital banks like Revolut, Wise and N26 competing with traditional banks?
We are keeping a pragmatic eye on the growth of these digital players. Digital banks meet very specific customer needs in terms of simplicity, speed and user experience, and they are helping to drive innovation in the financial sector. In that respect, they can promote healthy, stimulating competition.
But we need to make sure that any comparisons are made on the same terms.Traditional banks play a much broader role, especially in financing the economy, managing risks, protecting deposits and providing financial stability. So the principle of "same activity, same risks, same rules" is crucial, especially when it comes tocompliance.
Banks in Luxembourgare investing heavily in the ongoing digital transitionand are developing partnerships with fintechs. The future of the sector will not be based on opposing models but on co-existence rooted in innovation, confidence and a balanced regulatory framework. The gap between the two models is becoming smaller.
4. How important isfintechfor the Luxembourg financial sector?
Fintechis a major strategic driver for the competitiveness and attractiveness of the Luxembourg financial sector. It is helping us to modernise and improve the efficiency of financial services and better meet the needs of clients by implementing new technologies across the entire value chain.Luxembourg has a dynamicfintechecosystem, supported by a clear regulatory framework and international openness.
In this context,the ABBL has an essential role to play as an intermediary between traditional banks, fintechs and authorities.The aim is not to pit different models against each other but to encourage synergies, partnerships and the emergence of effective solutions that serve the real economy. By fostering dialogue and creating an environment conducive to sharing expertise and controlled experimentation, we will continue to build an innovative, responsible and sustainable financial sector in which technology boosts confidence rather than replacing it.
The success of initiatives like our "Bank CEOs & Fintechs Speed Meeting" demonstrates that there is a real thirst for cooperation between the two sectors.
5. How is artificial intelligence transforming the financial sector in Luxembourg?
Artificial intelligence is gradually transforming the Luxembourg financial sector by improving operational efficiency, quality of service, risk management and profitability. It already offers specific applications in areas such as automation, tackling fraud and money laundering, optimising compliance and personalising client relations.If used responsibly, AI can be an effective driver of competitiveness for the financial centre.
The ABBL believes that this transition must take place within a clear, ethical and secure framework.The association is supporting its members with the adoption of AI by encouraging them to share best practices, promoting dialogue with authorities and anticipating EU regulatory frameworks, especially theAI Act. Our role is to make sure technological innovation strengthens confidence, protects customers and supports the financing of the real economy.
Last update18.02.2026
For more information
Le secteur financier, pièce maîtresse de l’économie
Green Finance
La place financière: un centre financier transfrontalier majeur, doté d'une offre unique
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/luxembourg-place-financiere.html
The financial sector, cornerstone of the economy
Luxembourg has a successful and innovative financial centre. With more than 120 international banks from 25 countries and approximately €1,000 billion in assets, the financial centre plays a key role in the country's prosperity. The CEO of Luxembourg for Finance, Tom Theobald, tells us about the challenges the Luxembourg financial centre is dealing with today.
The financial sector is hugely important for the Luxembourg economy.It represents more than60,000 jobs, making it one of the country's biggest employers, and it is a significant contributor to the country's wealth.More than 120 banks from 25 countries, as well as financial institutions and international insurance companies, are based in Luxembourg, where they manage approximately €1,000 billion of assets.
A member of the exclusiveTriple Aclub
The huge sums of money administered by the banks in Luxembourg in connection with their financial activities are a clear indication of the health of the financial centre.
The stability of the sector is achieved bya low debt burden, tight control of government debt and a balanced policy approach, which have enabled Luxembourg to maintain its AAA rating, the gold standard from ratings agencies Moody’s, S&P Global, Fitch and Morningstar DBRS. The only other countries to belong to the exclusive club ofTriple Aholders alongside Luxembourg are Australia, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Norway and Sweden.
UCITS(Undertakings for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities) are a type of investment fund. Luxembourg has a 32% market share in European UCITS funds, representing €13.8 billion in assets under management. (Source: LFF)
Hedge fundsare alternative investment funds that aim for an absolute return, in other words a positive performance regardless of financial market volatility. To achieve this, hedge funds use various management strategies combining "long" positions (purchases) and "short" positions (short selling) so as to benefit from both rising and falling markets. (Source: BCL)
The eldorado of investment funds
Investment funds are the linchpin of the financial centre.The total value of the assets managed by investment funds in Luxembourg is more than €5,000 billion.This colossal volume of capital is an excellent indicator of the global importance of the country's financial centre. Luxembourg is thelargest centre for investment funds in Europe and the second largest worldwideafter the United States in terms of assets under management.
The Luxembourg financial centre is the preferred domicile forUCITSfunds and alternative funds such as private equity,hedge funds, real estate and infrastructure. Many investment funds choose Luxembourg because of its favourable legislation, attractive tax framework and well-established regulatory environment.
Leader in green finance
Luxembourg's financial centre has never stopped innovating since its early days. It is constantly reinventing itself to adapt to economic and technological developments. Since 2007, it has begun to position itself as akey player in sustainable finance, with the listing of the first green bond by the European Investment Bank.
In 2016, the Luxembourg Stock Exchange launched theLuxembourg Green Exchange(LGX), the world's first dedicated platform for green securities and sustainable financial instruments. With more than 3,700 listed sustainable securities worth a total of €1,000 billion, the country is positioning itself as a world leader in this sector.
But the financial centre is also looking ahead anddeveloping financial products in the field of Fintech, which is where the future of finance lies. With a favourable regulatory framework, Luxembourg is attracting innovative companies specialising in payments, blockchain and digital finance.
3 questions for Tom Theobald, CEO of Luxembourg for Finance
What makes the Luxembourg financial centre different from other financial centres in Europe or around the world?
For several decades, our financial centre has been notable for its cross-border expertise and the fact that we enable financial players to offer their products widely around the world. The Luxembourg investment fund industry, for example, which is second only to the United States at global level, distributes its products in more than 80 countries. And Luxembourg currently accounts for nearly two-thirds of the alternative funds in Europe.
Luxembourg has a highly diverse financial centre and has developed expertise in different parts of the value chain in the global financial industry. Whether for assets management, insurance, corporate banking, wealth management or capital markets, Luxembourg is a gateway to the European market, linking Europe to global capital.
Within Europe, Luxembourg also stands out for its multilingualism, which makes it attractive to operators from all over the world and enables it to serve a broad international client base. Finally, Luxembourg's economic, legal and political stability has made it one of the few countries to keep hold of itsTriple Arating. It offers an internationally-oriented regulatory framework with a high degree of legal certainty and compliance with all European and international regulations and standards.
"Luxembourg currently accounts for nearly two-thirds of the alternative funds in Europe."
Tom Theobald, CEO of Luxembourg for Finance
What are the main challenges facing the Luxembourg financial centre today?
Like all financial centres in Europe, the Luxembourg financial centre is constantly looking for highly qualified talent to keep moving up the value chain, comply with new requirements in terms of international regulations and remain at the forefront of innovation in financial services. The recent measures adopted by the government (bonuses for new young employees, a new tax regime for impatriates and a more attractive profit-sharing bonus) should boost the recruitment of young talent from well beyond the Greater Region.
These new experts will also help to sustain the pace of innovation, especially the digital transition. The financial industry needs to make major investments to digitize its services and integrate new technologies (AI and blockchain) in its processes, while also giving itself the tools it needs to manage growing cybersecurity risks.
At the same time, we need to pull out all the stops to make the Luxembourg financial centre a key part of the future Savings and Investment Union, an EU project to improve capital flows within the European area.
How is the financial centre integrating emerging technologies like blockchain and artificial intelligence?
Luxembourg invested at a very early stage to provide itself with infrastructures that would underpin the digital transition, such as access to high-speed internet and the installation of powerful data centres. MeluXina-AI, a new supercomputer optimized for artificial intelligence, will soon be a new addition to this landscape.
TheCommission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (CSSF)was the first supervisory authority in Europe to take a clear position on crypto-assets back in 2014, and it published a first White Paper on the use of AI in the financial sector in 2018. Recently the CSSF has signed a strategic agreement on artificial intelligence with Clarence, the Luxembourg sovereign air-gapped cloud.
With the launch of the public-private sector initiativeLhoFTin 2017, Luxembourg established a national Fintech hub that provides young tech startups with favourable conditions for growth, linking them with a financial sector that is on the lookout for innovative solutions.
In December 2024, the Luxembourg parliament adopted a fourth "BlockchainAct". Since 2019 and the adoption of a first act paving the way for activities related to digital assets, Luxembourg has developed one of the most advanced legal frameworks in Europe. It offers legal certainty and safety for companies wishing to hold, issue or trade in digital assets. The bank HSBC has taken advantage of this secure environment to launch its global tokenization platform Orion in Luxembourg. In autumn 2024, US asset manager Franklin Templeton also made the most of this legal framework to launch the firstUCITSfund based on a public blockchain. And this is just the beginning.
Last update25.02.2025
Green Finance
Logistique
Philanthropy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/health-technologies-thriving-innovative-sector.html
Health technologies: a thriving and innovative sector
Supported by flourishing public-private partnerships, innovative incubators and a prolific and supportive research environment, it's no wonder the HealthTech industry in the Grand Duchy is booming! The sector brings together talent from around the world to develop innovative services and products focused on digital health and personalised medicine.
A fledgling industry searching for personalised, digital solutions
Luxembourg's healthcare sector is a fledgling yet thriving industrywith around 150 companies dedicated to the development of digital healthcare products, services and tools. Benefiting from the country's expertise and cutting-edge information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, Luxembourg's HealthTech players are focusing their attention oninnovation in the fields of e-health, applications, mobile technologies and health data management systems. Their goal is to foster global growth in the personalised medicine sector and to promote a heightened level of prevention as well as more effective diagnosis and treatment.
Launch your start-up in a collaborative environment at the heart of Europe
Infrastructures and initiatives, such as theHouse of BioHealthincubator, offer start-ups the chance to establish themselves in the Grand Duchy in a dynamic and creative environment that brings togetherpublic and private research institutes, a host of companies and local hospitals.
TheFit 4 Startaccelerator programme, managed by Luxinnovation, supports leading HealthTech start-ups by providing coaching, financial support, office space and networking opportunities. Since its launch in 2015, the programme has played a pivotal role in the development of numerous international talents and innovative projects, such as Molecular Plasma Group, Wavy Meet, Dynaccurate, Posture AI and VoiceMed.
Did you know?
In March 2024, Luxembourg launched theDataspace 4 Healthproject, which aims to enable the secure health data exchange through an open platform in compliance with the EU’s GPDR and patients’ rights. The initiative, led by public and private stakeholders, fosters data-driven innovation and research to improve digital healthcare.
3 questions for Arianna Arienzo, CEO of VoiceMed
VoiceMed, a start-up founded during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, has developed an innovative technology for measuring health based on artificial intelligence and voice biomarkers. In 2022, the start-up was selected for Luxinnovation's Fit 4 Start accelerator programme.
1. Why did you choose Luxembourg as the base for your company? In your opinion, what specific challenges and opportunities do healthcare technology start-ups like VoiceMed face in the country?
VoiceMed was founded by an international team - an Italian, a Frenchman and a Brazilian. All the founders came from different countries and lived in various locations, including Luxembourg. From a bureaucratic perspective, we found it relatively easy to register the company in Luxembourg, even if two of the three founders couldn't physically travel to Luxembourg when VoiceMed was launched in 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
When we were working on our first data set to create our initial vocal biomarker for health screening, VoiceMed was able to establish a partnership with theNational Health Laboratory (LNS). This was made possible thanks to Luxembourg's small ecosystem. It has also enabled seamless integration with the electronic health record. This significantly boosted our data collection in a cost-efficient manner. Subsequently, VoiceMed was selected for a grant, which gave us the initial visibility we needed.
2. In 2022, you took part in Luxinnovation's Fit 4 Start programme.  How has this initiative helped you to develop as a young company?
Since 2022, VoiceMed has developed its major asset:  the biobank of human sounds, which has allowed us to develop different algorithms and create three biomarkers to date. The Fit 4 Start initiative has indeed helped us, and now VoiceMed has launched the first product on the market, allowing every person to conduct a quick health check using their smartphone. Our commercial strategy aims to integrate our technology into other health apps to enhance the integration process for health insurance members or healthcare providers, enabling our clients to create personalised programmes.
3. Do you have any key advice for young entrepreneurs who want to launch their projects in Luxembourg, in particular in the HealthTech sector?
Leverage the network as much as possible.  It's relatively easy in Luxembourg to acquaint oneself with the ecosystem and the relevant individuals in order to develop a pilot project.  Furthermore, being proficient in multiple languages will enable your team to expand into nearby markets.  As I often tell my students at the medical faculty at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore (Milan, Italy), my advice for launching a company in HealthTech is as follows:
About Fit 4 Start |   (Video/Audio YouTube)
Meet our startups | Molecular Plasma Group (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update26.02.2026
For more information
Start-up Luxembourg: votre portail de l'écosystème
House of Startups: le maillon dans l'écosystème des jeunes pousses
Le bioincubateur de la House of Biohealth
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/wood-industry.html
Wood, an industry with a bright future
Wood, the epitome of all traditional building materials, is currently playing a key role in two major political challenges in Luxembourg: the development of a circular economy and the fight against the impact of climate change.
Wood isone of Luxembourg's oldest and most natural resources. Forests are anexceptional asset with huge potential, only two-thirds of which is used: they represent a virtually unique model of sustainable harvesting at the intersection of environmental, economic and societal challenges.
Sustainable development is the keystone of this industry. This involves a value chain based on high quality regional products in a circular economy context, with local companies that are not afraid to embrace innovation. Indeed, innovation enables companies that are active in the sector to unlock the full potential of wood as a resource and to optimise its development and use, from the sustainable development of forests to short delivery routes, high-end products and ultimately waste recovery.
A dynamic ecosystem
In Luxembourg,the wood industry represents more than 1,500 SMEsworking directly or indirectly in the nine links that make up the value chain. More than three-quarters of these listed companies have fewer than 50 employees, and 60% have fewer than ten.Since most of the companies are owner-run, they have a direct interest in innovative products and services, making a significant contribution to innovation and digitalisation in the wood industry.
The sector is also continuing to focus onbespoke solutions, for example in skilled trades and the supply industry, laying the foundations for a more diverse commercial base.
Around 60 companies come under the category of "sustainable development facilitators", working in areas such as smart buildings, energy efficiency and the circular economy. These include regional timber construction companies and manufacturers of wood cladding and specialised products based on wood systems.
Did you know?
The use of wood as a resource in Luxembourg dates back to before the country's independence and has long been a mainstay of the region's economy. The country was known as the "Département des forêts" (Department of Forests) between 1795 and 1814, and theLuxembourg Nature and Forest Agency (ANF), established in 1840, is one of Luxembourg's longest-standing national administrations.
The Luxembourg Wood Cluster: your partner
The Luxembourg Wood Cluster was set up in 2016 to serve this ecosystem and provide aplatform where all the stakeholders in the wood industry can exchange ideas and information. It is a forum for innovative private and public regional players, both companies and research centres, giving those in the industry in Luxembourg and the Greater Region the opportunity to share their experience.
The Cluster is also working on broad strategies to foster innovation for companies and to promote and showcase regional and circular products and alternative solutions for the technical implementation and financial viability of carbon-neutral building.
Itoffers its members a wide variety of services, including:
Given the proximity of member companies, the Cluster naturally fosters collaboration and the implementation of partnerships and other collective projects at national and European level.
Last update07.02.2025
For more information
Industry in Luxembourg: a sector on the move
Annen Plus - contemporary and sustainable architecture
Key sectors
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/luxembourg-artemis-mission.html
Luxembourg with one foot on the moon
The launch of the powerful SLS (Space Launch System) rocket on 16 November marked the official start of the Artemis programme. It took off from the Kennedy Space Center to launch the Orion spacecraft to the Moon. By 2025, the United States wants to establish a crew on the moon with the aim of preparing future missions to the planet Mars. These space projects are part of a programme named Artemis.
Together with 20 other countries that have signed the Artemis Agreements with the US, Luxembourg is an integral part of this ambitious programme. The partnership withNASAfits perfectly with Luxembourg's efforts to support space exploration and the development of the sector at national and international level.
A Japanese rover made in Luxembourg
Until now, Luxembourg has built up a solid reputation in the field of space and has no lack of ambition to be at the centre of activities in this field. In just a few years, the Grand Duchy has succeeded in bringing together no less than 70 companies in the space sector at the cutting edge of technology.
Thanks to the resources invested in ESA programmes, which enable Luxembourg-based companies to develop their technologies and services in this field, the Grand Duchy seems to have sniffed out a good opportunity for the use and exploitation of space resources.
Today, within the framework of theArtemisproject, the country continues to position itself in the exploration of the Moon. Thanks to the Japanese companyispace, which has its European headquarters in the Grand Duchy, Luxembourg is boarding the Japanese lunar lander in order to set foot on the Moon in 2024. Under the contract with NASA, the lunar exploration company is collecting mineral material from the surface of this natural satellite of the Earth. The robot rover is entirely developed and built in Luxembourg. In a former logistics building of the companyPaul Wurthit was tested under conditions that best simulate the surface of the Moon.
The Artemis I mission
With the lift-off of the SLS rocket last November, the Artemis programme was officially launched. On this mission, calledArtemis Ihe Orion spacecraft will only circle the Moon without landing. This test flight is carried out without passengers, but only with dummies, covered with sensors to measure, among other things, the level of radiation to which astronauts would be exposed. There is no one on board the Orion spacecraft that has been landed atop this titanic launcher.
After a 26-day journey and over two million kilometres, the Orion spacecraft returned to Earth on 11 December and landed in the Pacific Ocean.
In the coming years,Artemis II and Artemis IIIwill complement the Artemis programme. The first manned flight to orbit the Moon is planned for 2024, during the Artemis II mission, which will take astronauts to the Moon, but without landing. This is the crew of Artemis III, which will bring a crew back to the moon in 2025 at the earliest.
The Grand Duchy remains in orbit
In recent years, the space industry has experienced significant growth in Luxembourg. The country is home to the world leader in satellite communicationsSES. In 2016 it launched theSpaceResources.luinitiative and hosts theESRIC, the new centre dedicated to research and development related to space resources.
At the last European Space Agency (ESA) Ministerial Council in Paris, Luxembourg even reaffirmed its commitment to space. The financial effort of the Grand Duchy in the various ESA programmes amounts to 127 million euros for the period 2023 to 2027.
Luxembourg with one foot on the moon
What is a big step for humanity will perhaps soon also be a big step for Luxembourg. Indeed, a small part of Luxembourg will be in space in the near future.
Indeed, in May 2021, theEuropean Space Agency (ESA)had launched a call for applications for new astronauts. Out of 22,500 applications, 17 candidates were selected, including the Belgian-LuxembourgishRaphaël Liégeois.
He is considered a Belgian astronaut because he was born in Belgium. His parents moved to Differdange in the early 2000s, where they still live today. Married with two children, Raphaël Liégeois is a researcher at the University of Geneva and at the Ecole Polytechnique de Lausanne. He studied at the University of Liege. His father works at theLuxembourg Institute of Socio-Economic Research (Liser).
Three questions to Marc Serres, CEO of the Luxembourg Space Agency (LSA)
1. With the return to Earth of the Orion spacecraft, the Artemis I mission has just been completed. 
 Was the mission a success ? 
 If so, why ?
The objective of this first mission was to demonstrate the proper functioning of the transportation system that astronauts will use to go to the Moon, before there are any passengers. 
 It is indeed already a great success. 
 NASA will now analyse all the data collected during this first mission to make the necessary improvements for the next flight that will house astronauts. This mission is also a great success for Europe. 
 The capsule is powered by a service module that has been developed and manufactured in Europe. 
 This is an essential and indispensable element for the proper functioning of this and future missions with astronauts. 
 It is not very visible, unfortunately, but we can be proud as Europeans to be part of this new space age in the human rediscovery of the Moon.
2. What is the importance of this programme for the whole of astronautics?
This is not only an important programme for astronautics, but for humanity as a whole. 
 We are experiencing what our parents experienced in the Appollo years. 
 Going back to the Moon with astronauts is an incredible feat. 
 Only three nations have so far managed to land instruments on the Moon : 
 the United States, China and the Soviet Union. And this is just robotic exploration. 
 NASA's approach to developing lunar activities also gives industry an important role. 
 In the coming months, we will see the first company-developed lunar landers land on the Moon. 
 It is extremely exciting to be able to witness all these technological advances.
3. Why is the Artemis I mission or the Artemis mission in general important for Luxembourg?
In 2016, Luxembourg announced its Spaceresources.lu initiative. The objective is to promote peaceful exploration and sustainable use of space resources. 
 Luxembourg's vision is for a new space economy that can only come about if we are able to use the resources where we go into space. And it starts with the Moon. 
 To envisage human activities on the surface of the Moon without resorting to the use of resources available on the Moon is utopian. 
 And this is even more true for the future exploration of Mars. 
 A model where everything would have to be transported from Earth to Mars, which is almost a year away from Earth, does not seem to me to be a realistic model. 
 Participating in the Artemis programme is therefore a unique opportunity for Luxembourg to be able to demonstrate, test and validate on the Moon the technologies linked to the use of space resources that are developed by our research centres and our companies.
Last update07.02.2025
For more information
Aerospace
Logistics
Financial Centre: a leading cross-border financial centre with a unique offering
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/artemis-luxembourg-lune.html
Artemis - Luxembourg heads for the Moon
America wants to get back to the Moon by 2024. The aim of the mission is to explore the 'Earth's natural satellite' and set up a lunar base. This ambitious programme goes by the name of Artemis. Luxembourg is one of the eight countries taking part in the mission.
America is turning its attention to the Moon again. America wants toland a team on the lunar surfaceby 2024 and set up a permanent base camp with a view to planning future missions to Mars. These space projects are part of aprogramme named Artemis. Luxembourg, one of the first countries to sign up to the Artemis Accords, is on board the mission.
A unique global coalition
Together with the six other countries - Australia, Canada, Italy, Japan, the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom - which have signed the Accords with the United States, Luxembourg will be contributing its knowledge in the field of space resources.
Since the launch of theSpaceResources.luinitiative in 2016, the Grand Duchy's strategy has always been to strengthen the space sector, with the aim of exploring the universe andusing its resources. Given the many companies derived from the space industry that have been set up in the Grand Duchy, it's fair to say that the gamble has paid off.
To provide a better framework and strengthen the links between the various players, the SpaceResources initiative set up theLuxembourg Space Agency (LSA)in 2018.
ESCRIC – the latest newcomer
The Luxembourg space family has just welcomed a major newcomer. Collaboration between the Luxembourg Space Agency (LSA), the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST) and the European Space Agency (ESA) has resulted in a newcentre dedicated to research and development in connection with space resources.
The newcomer, which is the result of this three-cornered relationship, is named ESRIC, which stands for European Space Resources Innovation Centre. ESRIC is one of a kind in Europe; its aim is to become aninternationally recognised pole of expertise in the scientific, technical, commercial and economic aspectsof using space resources.
The new centre set up in the Grand Duchy will not focus exclusively on research and development in connection with space resources; it will also contribute to economic growth by supporting commercial initiatives and start-ups. It will also include a business incubatorand facilitate the transfer of technologies among space industries and industries outside the sector.
ESRIC is an integral part of the Grand Duchy's space ecosystem; it is promoted and supported by the LSA, and managed and hosted by LIST. The ESA will be making installations available, implementing research activities within the ESRIC, and providing thebusiness incubatorwith technical and commercial support.
The creation of the ESRIC platform is part of the SpaceResources.lu initiative launched in 2016 to establish an ecosystem conducive to developing activities in connection with exploring and using the universe's resources.
The Moon is not enough
This is just the start of the Grand Duchy's adventuring into space. Barely in existence, the Luxembourg Space Agency has just signed an agreement with its big brother in the United States,NASA. In all, eight space agencies worldwide are associates in the Artemis Accords for exploring the Moon and setting up a permanent station. NASA, at the head of this large-scale programme, is expecting to send the first woman and the next man to the Moon by 2024.
This means that for the first time since 1972 NASA is looking to put astronauts back on the surface of the Moon. But apart from landing on the Moon, the eight-part coalition also intends to prepare ahistoric mission to Marsfrom the lunar base.
According to NASA, the aim of this international cooperation, as well as supporting space exploration, is tostrengthen peaceful relations among the nations. NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine puts it like this : "With this signing(of the Artemis Accords, ed.), we are uniting with our partners to explore the Moon and are establishing vital principles that will create a safe, peaceful and prosperous future in space for all of humanity to enjoy."
3 questions for Marc Serres, Director of the Luxembourg Space Agency (LSA)
1. Luxembourg has just entered into a strategic partnership with the European Space Agency (ESA) in order to create the European Space Resources Innovation Centre (ESRIC). What does that mean for the Grand Duchy?
The creation of ESRIC is an important stage in implementing the SpaceResources.lu initiative launched by the Government in 2016. It is specifically directed at public-funded research in this field. The Centre is a vital part of implementing the national policy on exploring and using space resources. Apart from this national aspect, ESRIC also fills a gap at the European level, as there is no other centre of this type in Europe as yet. This means the partnership with the ESA also adds a European dimension to the initiative right from the outset. This is a field that will require much more research and innovation. Opening the Centre to collaboration at the level of Europe and beyond is essential if we are to advance knowledge in this field.
2. What are the main challenges facing the European Space Resources Innovation Centre (ESRIC), both now and in the future?
The use of space resources is a field in which there is still much to discover and invent. After the creation phase, the Centre will have to find its place firstly in Europe and subsequently on the global stage. The aim is to create a centre of excellence in the field of exploring and using space resources. Making itself known and subsequently recognised will certainly be one of the major challenges facing the Centre.
3. As part of the ESRIC project, Luxembourg signed a partnership with the ESA. In the Artemis project, Luxembourg is taking part in a NASA programme. Is there any possibility of projects with players such as India, Russia and China?
From the start of the SpaceResources.lu initiative, the Grand Duchy has sought to develop collaboration with other countries worldwide. Indeed a cooperation agreement was signed with China in 2018. There have been discussions with both India and Russia, but there are no results as yet. International cooperation, in the form of bilateral and multilateral relations, is going to be extremely important in the field of space resources. I am convinced that ESRIC will be a very useful tool in international cooperation in the coming years.
Last update07.02.2025
Aerospace
Meluxina: Luxembourg's new supercomputer
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/circular-economy.html
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Circular economy is the future. The idea of endlessly recycling or even upgrading resources could solve essential problems of our time, i.e. environmental protection or scarcity of resources. Luxembourg recognised the opportunities early on and is now actively strengthening its Circular and Performance Economy.
A key pillar of the Luxembourg economy
Circular economy is all aboutusing resources in the most efficient, non-destructive way for as long as possible. By optimising the design and usage, waste will be minimised or even eliminated. Because today, the pressure on our current business model is rising in view of an increasing competition from low cost countries as well as the scarcity of raw materials in Europe and particularly in Luxembourg. Strict environmental regulations and legal obligations by the European and national legislators are pushing for the implementation of circular economy, as environmental damage is becoming an increasingly costly burden and a threat to quality of live.
In order to tackle the challenges ahead,Luxembourg has made impressive progress, becoming a leader in Circular Economy. The ‘Third Industrial Revolution’-strategy of the Luxembourg Government defines Circular Economy as a key horizontal topic underlying all its other six pillars. In 2019, the Ministry of the Economy integrated the Circular Economy in itsData-driven Innovation Strategyas a key-sector for innovation in the years to come.
Performance Economy
Imagine that a company does not just offer you a specific product or commodity, but they rather offer you a performance. The supplier keeps full ownership of his products and only agrees to deliver a specific result. This is essentially the idea behind the concept of the ‘Performance Economy’, an approach that researchers claim is a win-win-model for customers, service providers and the environment.
Performance economies create an incentive for the service providers to design their products as efficiently as possible so that they may be reused, repaired or recycled completely. But while such business models offer great opportunities for everyone, their ubiquitous implementation still remains a challenge due to the substantial transition costs, complexity of contract, insurance issues or legal obligations and restrictions.
Luxembourg, your partner of choice
Luxembourg is currently positioning itself to become theideal partner for all companies deciding to prepare for the future by venturing into the Circular or Performance Economy. Thus the ministry of the Economy, together with Luxinnovation, is building an ecosystem and putting together support packages, dedicated to help businesses thrive in this promising area.
The future is now
Circular and Performance Economies, even if it still sounds largely futuristic, isalready present in many sectors of the Luxembourg Economy. And although we are only at the beginning of discovering the possibilities, it constitutes already an interesting test market. Mostly in urban development and the closely related construction sectors, large projects are currently already being planned or realised, such as:Wunnen mat der Wooltz, Automotive Campus,Néi Schmelzor urbanistic projects such as the Kirchberg-Plateau.
Harnessing data – the Circularity Dataset Initiative
Launched in 2019, the Luxembourg Governemnt’sCircularity Dataset Initiativeaims to develop anindustry standard template for circular data on productsin order to provide reliable data on circular product properties. To date, alreadymore than 50 companies from 12 countries and industry leadershave joined the project and the initiative is a prime example of Luxembourg’s Data-driven Innovation Strategy translated into concrete action.
Last update17.10.2025
Green Finance
Automotive sector and smart mobility
Investment aid
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/maritime-sector.html
Maritime sector
Even though Luxembourg does not have direct access to the sea, the maritime sector has been developing since the 1990s. More than 200 ships fly the flag boasting the red lion and around 225 companies active in the sector are established in Luxembourg. These companies include leading global stakeholders.
Supporting the blue economy
Luxembourg presents itself as an ideal business location for maritime companies. It offers awell-developed infrastructure, an attractive economic environment and excellent opportunities in the field of research and development.
In fact, a large number of companies active in this sector are established in Luxembourg. They include ship owners, ship management, ship building, dredging and logistics companies as well as service providers – consulting, law firms and insurers, experts in finance – and even stakeholders in the space sector who are capable of providing maritime surveillance solutions.The Luxembourg maritime sector is growing and currently employs approximately 1,000 people!
How can a landlocked country with no navy or maritime history play host a significant merchant fleet?
The key to unlocking this industry lies in the legal framework. As such, the Grand Duchy offers competitive and flexible conditions, while strictly adhering to the guidelines issued by the relevant international organisations. As part of its economic diversification, Luxembourg decided to create thepublic maritime registerin 1990.
In only 30 years, the maritime fleet flying Luxembourg flag has grown from 54 ships in 1993 to 216 ships in 2020. Let us put this figure in perspective: 670 ships are registered in Greece, while the country controls a fleet of over 4,000 ships, and 300 in Germany, out of a merchant fleet of about 2,000 ships.
Since launching the register, Luxembourg has carved out a niche in the sector, which consists ofsmall transporters,dredgers,tugsandsupply ships.
Cluster maritime luxembourgeois (Video/Audio YouTube)
TheLuxembourg Maritime Cluster ('Cluster maritime luxembourgeois')was launched in 2008 in order to further facilitate the development of the maritime sector. Its objective is todevelop and promote the blue economy in Luxembourg. The alliances formed with, among others, the Luxembourg Cluster for Logistics and the European Network of Maritime Clusters make networking much easier.
Single point of contact
TheLuxembourg Maritime Administrationwas created in 1991. It is the contact point for all matters relating to the maritime sector. The Administration acts as thesupervisory authorityfor the sector and, more specifically, for licensed shipping companies operating out of Luxembourg. It also ensurescompliance with the provisions set out by the lawand is responsible for monitoring the development of international maritime law, particularly within the European Union.
It also acts as aservice provider, for which quality and efficiency are key attributes. To this end, it set up a system of quality management in 2000. This system is certified by the TÜV Rheinland and audited on a regular basis according to ISO 9001:2015 requirements.
Sailing towards a more sustainable maritime future
Growing demands for amore sustainable economyas well as the global drive toreduce emissionsrepresent one of the major challenges for the fuel-dependent maritime sector. The maritime industries are gradually appreciating their vital role in the energy transition, and are studying alternative fuels and emission-reduction technologies.
The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 73/78) is the starting point in terms of environmental compliance. Additionally, in 2013, the European Commission set out a strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the shipping sector. Large ships of more than 5,000 tons loading and unloading in European Economic Area ports must adhere to this strategy.
In this regard, one of Luxembourg's maritime companies has taken the lead with a brand new rating established in 2019 by Bureau Veritas:Ultra-Low Emission vessels (ULEv). The company,Jan de Nul, has been awarded this rating for itsultra-low emission, diesel-electric powered vessels with a performance that exceeds the regulatory requirements.
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
Automotive sector and smart mobility
Foreign Trade
Mobilité
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/green-finance.html
Green Finance
The Luxembourg Government has launched several initiatives with the aim to promote innovative financial ideas to fight against climate change. The Grand Duchy is already emerging as a Green Finance leader. Did you know that the first "green"' stock exchange was in the Grand Duchy?
Luxembourg Green Exchange
With 133 green bonds of an accumulated value of €63 billion, the newgreen section of theLuxembourg Stock Exchangeis the world leader on the marketwith almost half of all listed green bonds. The Luxembourg Green Exchange was founded in 2016 and it is the first platform entirely dedicated to green, social and sustainable financial instruments. It is part of the government's strategy focusing on Luxembourg's development in respect of Green Finance.
Supporting climate finance
The Climate Finance Task Force is a think tank made up of public and private key players of Luxembourg. It was created to support the global action plan with a view to implementing the Paris agreement.It lies at the root of the national climate finance strategy developed in 2016. Only one year later, theClimate Finance Acceleratorjoined the initiativesthat had already been put in place. It offered its support to investment fund managers looking to invest in projects related to the fight against climate change. Luxembourg devotes all its energy towards theestablishment of an international green finance centre.
A collective undertaking
Leveraginginvestments for projects with a strong impact in the fight against climate changeis crucial. In this context, the Luxembourgish government and the European Investment Bank have launched a collaborative project: aclimate finance platformthat has already released 30 million euros in favour of climate related projects!
Luxembourg Green Exchange - Unlocking green capital (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg Green Exchange
SUSTAINABLE FINANCE (Video/Audio YouTube)
Sustainable Finance
Last update11.06.2025
For more information
Financial Centre: a leading cross-border financial centre with a unique offering
Portrait of the Luxembourg economy
Green Finance
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/mice.html
Business and congress tourism (MICE)
Are you looking for a unique setting for your next congress, conference, seminar or show? Are you planning a business trip? The best infrastructures can be found in Luxembourg, the heart of Europe and the ideal place to combine business, culture and leisure.
Luxembourg positions itself more than ever as a large hub for business and conferences, with its long tradition of cultural and commercial exchange, itsmultilingualandmulticulturalenvironment, its prime strategic location and itshigh-quality MICE(meetings, incentives, conventions, events)infrastructure.
The teams of theBusiness Events Luxembourgwill help you find the right infrastructure foryour event and develop a programme featuring tours and interesting activities.
Let yourself be impressed bythe advantages of Luxembourg as a MICE destination! Here are some of them:
A World Champion chooses Luxembourg - An unconventional MICE tour (Video/Audio YouTube)
A World Champion chooses Luxembourg - An unconventional MICE tour
Last update03.09.2024
Regions
Arts et culture
Sortir en soirée
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/ict.html
Information and communication technologies
Digitalisation goes hand in hand with opportunities and challenges. Aware of the potential of a timely and suitable technology, infrastructure and regulation, the Luxembourg government has placed digitalisation and information and communication technologies (ICT) at the heart of its concerns. In order to remain competitive at international level, the Grand Duchy pushes the development of digital infrastructures further.
Digital pioneer
Today, Luxembourgis already a prime location for companies from the ICT sector, which value guidance and modern infrastructures. But in order to remain competitive at international level, the Grand Duchy prioritises the development of its digital infrastructures. Artificial intelligence, 5G or setting up high performance computers (HPC) areat the very heart of Luxembourg's strategy.
Luxembourg's efforts are continuously recognised by international benchmarks. TheDigital Economy & Society Indexof the European Commission, which assesses the evolution of EU member states towards a digital economy and society, ranked Luxembourg in 6th position. In particular, the index notes the Grand Duchy's performances in the field of the adoption of fixed and mobile broadband. In terms of the information society,the ITUranked Luxembourg 9th in theworld.
Artificial intelligence
In a digital world filled with data, artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to revolutionise human life like few other technologies did before. This is whyLuxembourg got into artificial intelligence to become one of the most developed digital societies.The strategic vision of Luxembourg's IA is based on the country's ambition to position itself as a pioneer in the digital field.
Luxembourg is determined to play its role as forerunner, Luxembourg being the first European country that established a public-private partnership on AI with the company NVIDIA. This joint research laboratory means that there is a close collaboration between various members of the Luxembourg scientific community, including, in particular, the High-Performance Calculation Centre of the University of Luxembourg,the Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, the Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust and theLuxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, and NVIDIA, a company employing some of the best computer scientists in the world.
The data economy
Luxembourg has published astrategy on the economy of datadataand is in the process of establishing a high-performance computer(HPC)accessibleto economic and research key players. The HPC Competence Centre will not only act as a catalyst by promoting data governance, but will also make anonymisation and pseudonymisation services available, as well as access, location and data sale plarforms.
Moreover, the government has recognised the need for a nourishing  data ecosystem and has created theLuxembourg National Data Service (LNDS), an economic interest group,to implement Luxembourg’s strategies in research, innovation, and digitalisation. LNDS enables value creation from secondary use of data, for public and private partners and supports the sharing and re-use of public sector data, in a trustable manner.
The LNDS service portfolio includes know-how, capabilities, tools, infrastructure, and data services. The services are developed together with data partners, through concrete data projects. Through efficient & responsible use of data and improving the secondary use of data, LNDS will support the acceleration of economic, ecological, and societal transitions.
Cybersecurity
Luxembourg thinks of information security as a major factor of economic attractiveness. Luxembourg is 11th in the world on theGlobal Cybersecurity Index, and is the promoter of many collaborative projects in this field. Luxembourg promotes informed governance by harmonising the requirement rules of regulators to reduce compliance costs. State actors provide objective case scenarios and metrics to carry out comparative risk analysis and work closely with the cyber insurance sector. Luxembourg's cybersecurity ecosystem is mature and welcomes the confidence shown by the Luxembourgish economy and beyond.
Luxembourg ICT Cluster (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg ICT Cluster
Digital Luxembourg - where innovation is contagious (Video/Audio YouTube)
Digital Luxembourg - where innovation is contagious
Last update29.04.2025
For more information
Technological environment
Health technologies: a thriving and innovative sector
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/industrial-production.html
Industry in Luxembourg: a sector on the move
Deeply rooted in the Grand Duchy's heritage, Luxembourg's industrial sector is currently showcasing itself as a platform for sustainable innovation fully focused on efficient production which addresses environmental challenges and embraces new technologies. In its shift towards a new industrial era, the sector is preparing for a digitalised future in order to maintain its competitiveness and resilience.
Moving towards a new industrial age
Coupled with the energy transition of companies, the digital transformation of production techniques is currently guiding Luxembourg industry towards a new industrial era that welcomes the adoption of modern information and communication technologies as well as automated processes. Initiatives such as theDigital Innovation Hubaim to support companies in this evolution, by providing expertise in the field of digital and innovative technologies and fostering networking at national and European level.
The DIH ON TOUR or L-DIH Talks programmes deal with issues such as sustainability and digital transformation, while supporting the interconnection of stakeholders. It also provides an opportunity to share experience and knowledge. Visits to modern sites and prospecting missions abroad enable to explore best practices outside the Grand Duchy and raise awareness of the need for transition in the sector.
The steel industry: origin of the country's wealth
The steel industry: origin of the country's wealthSince the 19th century, the steel industry has imposed itself as an important part of the Luxembourgish identity. It was, after all, at the root of the Grand Duchy's wealth and modernisation! Today, Luxembourg is the headquarters for the global leader in steel ArcelorMittal, resulting from the merger between Arcelor and the Mittal Steel Company in 2006.
Fun fact:  Did you know that 12,000 tonnes of Luxembourgish steel are found in the form of beams in theOne World Trade Center inNew York? ​
Would you like to develop a business in Luxembourg?
With the national innovation agency,Luxinnovation, stakeholders have access to support services and an extensive support network, with a view to facilitating the creation of synergies and added value in the industrial ecosystem.  This has resulted in new partnerships through national and international RDI (Research, Development and Innovation) projects.
Companies are supported by Luxinnovation teams, as well as other stakeholders such asFedilandEnergieagence, in analysing their needs in order to optimise processes and investments. Particular emphasis is placed on the sustainable transformation of companies and the modernisation of production equipment, reducing CO2 emissions and energy consumption, through theFit 4 Sustainabilityprogramme or theKlimaPakt fir Betriberinitiative.
This cooperative network is thus propelling Luxembourg's industry forward in its efforts to innovate and develop new technologies!
Industrial companies can benefit from awide range of financial aidto support their initiatives to improve energy efficiency, protect the environment and carry out RDI projects.
A prosperous industry
In the wake of the era dominated by the steel industry, Luxembourg set up a constructiveeconomic policy to develop new activities. Owning to the Grand Duchy's liberal, flexible and innovative legal framework, it has attracted a large number of leading international players. Several companies specialising in materials (such as plastics) and metals (like steel and aluminium) have chosen Luxembourg as the ideal location to set up their business.
Consequently, a highly diversified business landscape has developed in recent years, including:
LUXEMBOURG, YOUR PRIME BUSINESS LOCATION (Video/Audio YouTube)
LUXINNOVATION - MAKE INNOVATION HAPPEN
INNOVATION CHALLENGES AND TALENTS TO TACKLE THEM (Video/Audio YouTube)
FEDIL - THE VOICE OF LUXEMBOURG'S INDUSTRY
Last update08.10.2025
For more information
Foreign Trade
Intellectual property
Investment aid
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/logistics.html
Logistics
Are you looking for a well-connected logistics centre for your activities? Do you need first-class infrastructures to satisfy the needs of your clients? Located in the heart of Europe, Luxembourg has established itself as an ideal intercontinental and multimodal logistics hub for value-added logistics activities. Its well-developed and interconnected infrastructure enables rapid and cost-effective management, covering even the most specialised supply chains - a key success factor for companies with global cross-border activities.
Multimodality - combine the advantages of different types of transport
Mutimodal transport - the magic formula that is revolutionising logistics in Luxembourg. In fact, Luxembourg hosts two of the most significant logistic hubs in Europe and benefits from unrivalled connectivity to European markets.
Uni.lu: Master in Logistics and Supply Chain Management (Video/Audio YouTube)
Did you know?
TheLuxembourg Centre for Logistics and Supply Chain Managementat the University of Luxembourgis preparing the next generation of logistics managers. The Master's program at the centre has aChair in Digital Procurementwhich fosters partnerships between students and companies through research projects;the emphasis will be placed on the impact of technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine learning and blockchain in the field of procurement.
Seamless access to the single market
These logistic hubs also benefit fromseamless connectivity to the major motorway networksin Germany and France, as well as the motorways leading to the Belgian and Dutch ports.
Luxembourg actually benefits from itsadvantageous geographical location in the European Union, a single market of over 400 million persons. Connections from Luxembourg provide access to the markets which bring together 60% of the GDP of the EU:
Thereliable, programmed and combined rail links,are provided byCFL multimodalconnecting the main platforms in the EU and beyond,such as the North Sea, the Baltic Sea, the Iberian peninsula, the Mediterranean Sea, Turkey and China. Since 2019, therail link to Chinahas connected Luxembourg to the strategic city of Chengdu, making Luxembourg one of the dedicated European ports of entry for China.
Furthermore, theMertert river portprovides access to waterway traffic on the Moselle and the Rhine, a gateway to some of the most developed economic centres in Europe. At the same time, it is served by a rail line that allows goods and equipment to be brought in and out of Germany quickly. Direct access to the motorway also offers rapid distribution of goods in the cross-border region.
The combination of these hubs provides connections to several major European ports such as Antwerp, Zeebrugge, Rotterdam and Hamburg in the north and Barcelona, Marseille, Genoa or Trieste in the south.
Dedicated infrastructure for tailor-made solutions
Logistics parks
Two logistics parks,Eurohub Centre and Eurohub South, provide real estate solutions(i.e. by building or renting warehouse facilities) within easy reach of the airport, the multimodal rail/road terminal and the inland river port. Both have direct access to major European motorways. The parks are dedicated to value-added logistics activities. Since 2013, about 280,000 m2 of logistics warehouse facilities have been built or are under construction in Luxembourg, representing an investment of about € 285 million by the companies concerned.
Luxembourg High Security Hub
Located next to the airport’s cargo centre, theLuxembourg High Security Hubis amulti-service platform dedicated to the storage, handling and trading of valuable goods(e.g. artworks, fine wines, precious metals and collectible items). This state-of-the-art facility offers maximum security, controlled temperature and humidity storage conditions and features the latest technologies to ensure safe and secure storage.
The Luxembourg High Security Hub operates under the supervision of the customs administration and is subject to a tax and customs framework which requires that goods can only access and leave the Luxembourg High Security Hub through licensed operators. These are obliged to keep detailed inventories documenting the movements and physical locations of stored goods. Goods originating from non-EU countries that are imported into the Luxembourg High Security Hub benefit from a suspension of VAT and customs duties until their final importation into the EU.
Cluster for Logistics (Video/Audio YouTube)
Logistics Hub Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
Maritime sector
Mobilité
Foreign Trade
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/aerospace.html
Aerospace
Luxembourg wants to benefit from its advantage of  being a 'firstmover' through the exploitation of asteroids. In 2017, the Luxembourgish government introduced a legal framework offering legal security to owners of resources from outer space, with a view to becoming a European hub for the use and exploitation of space resources.
Luxembourg, a European aerospace hub
As thehome of the number one satellite operator in the world - the European Society of Satellites ('SES') - the Grand Duchy has imposed itself as the main actor in aerospace for over 30 years. In 2018, Luxembourg created its own space agency - theLuxembourg Space Agency (LSA)in order to remain at the cutting edge of the latest mining operation developments.
The LSA emphasizes commercial development and the creation of economic value and jobs. Dynamic enterprises such as Euro-Composites, Gradel, Hitec and Luxspace contribute to the creation of a real ecosystem. As a result, more and more SMEs active in space technologies and in particular the exploitation of asteroids are settling in Luxembourg.Today, Luxembourg's space industry represents 4% of the GDP and over 500 high-level jobs, seven research centres and over 20 specialist companies.
Exploitation of Near Earth Objects,how and why?
Did you know that space missions are an enormous waste of the planet's resources? However, these resources are also availableon Near EarthObjects (NEO). Thanks to technological advancements, it is possible to use such resources and even to repatriate rare soils from space. It represents a huge potential and significantly reduces the costs of space missions!
Having recognised this opportunity early on, Luxembourg developed theSpaceResources.luin 2016. The initiative is aimed at the creation of a favourable legal and judicial environment for private businesses. Thelaw on the exploitation and use of space resourcesthat was entered into force on 24 July 2017, greatly facilitates the sector's development and offers judicial security regarding entitlement to mineral resources gathered in space, which complies with international law. The law has been formulated in a way as to specifically grant companies the right to extract resources, such as minerals, water and other resources, in particular on asteroids.
The law does not create or imply any sovereignty over a territory or celestial body, and only refers to the appropriation of space resources. Were you aware that such a law is the first of its kind  in Europe and only existed in the United States so far?
Do you need help to get into the business?
Manycompetent partners are at your disposalto welcome you and fund your R&D proejcts in the field:
Luxembourg, the place for space development (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg, the place for space development
The Luxembourg Space Agency turns one! (Video/Audio YouTube)
The Luxembourg Space Agency turns one!
Last update08.10.2025
For more information
Investment aid
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Innovation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/automobile.html
Automotive sector and smart mobility
Luxembourg is not just an important location for suppliers in the automotive industry, but also an innovation hotspot for smart and sustainable mobility. The collaboration between all stakeholders in the sector plays a key role in advancing research and creating a dynamic environment. For this reason, and thanks to its modern infrastructure, world-renowned companies such as Goodyear and IEE use the Grand Duchy as the base for their development centres.
The advantages of the Grand Duchy
Luxembourg'stop-class digital infrastructure and excellent ICT ecosystemprovide a solid foundation for the future development of the sector. The specialists at the national agency Luxinnovation are tasked with promoting cross-sector cooperation and, as a result, supporting innovation and commercial development. This enables companies, research institutes and investors to find the partners they need to support and implement their projects. In view of the challenges ahead, the agency also supports start-ups in the incubation phase.
The Cluster's mission is to support innovation and business development by promoting cross-sector collaboration. It enables companies, research institutions and investors to find the necessary partners to initiate and execute their projects. With a focus on future challenges, the cluster also takes care of supporting startups during their incubation phase.
But collaboration is not only seen as important at national level. From 2018 to 2022, Luxembourg was part of the European Automotive Cluster (PAE) project, working alongside Germany, France, and Belgium to improve collaboration and competitiveness in the automotive industry within the Greater Region.
Likewise, the Grand Duchy fosters international partnerships to drive the development of next-generation mobility solutions. Thecross-border digital test bedfor autonomous and connected driving, which extends 215km across France, Germany and Luxembourg, is a perfect example. It offers industry and academia the opportunity to test innovative mobility solutions on public roads under a wide range of conditions.
A bright future
Luxembourg has set itself ambitious digitalisation targets for the future, that do not stop at the automotive industry. The expansion of 5G, the adoption of artificial intelligence and the implementation of innovative policies geared towards developing a data-driven economy are essential for a reliable and high-quality future of mobility. Accordingly, in the new 2023 coalition agreement, the Luxembourg government has set the goal of making the country the leading EU centre for research into driverless vehicles.
The AutoMobility Campus in Bissen will play an important role in realising this vision. Goodyear and IEE have already set up their development centres here. As a true open-air laboratory, the site encourages the establishment of research and innovation activities, providing unused spaces and shared infrastructures (parking, conference room, offices). With a long-term capacity of 4,000 people, the campus offers ample space for future projects. In addition, the planned business incubator is set to open its doors before the end of 2024.
Projects and partnerships
Whether local projects or international partnerships – Luxembourg is sparing no effort to stand out in the industry:
Pony.ai
At the beginning of 2024, Luxembourg established a partnership withPony.ai, a leader in the field of autonomous driving. The California-based company develops and markets autonomous driving technologies worldwide, with a strong focus on safety.
Through this partnership, Pony.ai aims to enter the European market, with Luxembourg serving as the ideal launchpad. The company plans to collaborate with leading players in the local mobility sector to potentially launch its autonomous vehicles on Luxembourg's roads as early as next year.
We aim to bring to this partnership our cutting-edge AV technology, comprehensive training programmes, and a commitment to establish a regional hub in Luxembourg as we continue our global expansion.
Dr. James Peng, CEO and co-founder of Pony.ai
CFL
One of the projects of the national railway company CFL (Société des chemins de fer luxembourgeois) is thedevelopment of an autonomous shuttle service. To this end, a partnership has been established with HMI Technologies, a New Zealand manufacturer of shuttles and connected vehicles.
Initial tests on public roads under everyday conditions have already been conducted in May this year in Belval. The official launch is scheduled for 2024 and aims to complement CFL's existing services.
UBIX
At the University of Luxembourg, research in intelligent mobility is also underway. SpecificallyUBIX, based at the Interdisciplinary Research Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT), focuses onautonomous vehicles.
The research is focused on how vehicles communicate with one another and with the surrounding traffic infrastructure. Here too, tests have already been conducted on public roads. The research team even provides an open-source version of their software and the collected data online.
How we're testing and perfecting self-driving cars in Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update12.03.2026
For more information
Technological environment
Mobility
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/financial-centre.html
Financial Centre: a leading cross-border financial centre with a unique offering
Luxembourg provides international financial firms with a solution-driven financial centre that provides a wide array of services to manage cross-border international finance. Home of the global fund industry, a recognised EU hub for international banks and insurers, and one of Europe's core capital market infrastructure locations, Luxembourg connects investors to markets across the world.
A solid and stable financial hub
A key characteristics of Luxembourg's financial sector is soundness which draws on theGrand Duchy's well-established political, economic, and social stability. Luxembourg's debt-to-GDP ratio stood at just 24% at the end of 2022 compared to the EU average of 86.4%. The country hasconsistently been rewarded for the prudent and responsible management of public financeand is one of few countries in the world with aAAA credit rating from all major ratings agencies.
A sound legal framework primarily based on EU legislationis also a key characteristic of Luxembourg, with the country's strength as a financial centre resting on key legal pillars. These include a first-mover advantage from the efficient implementation of EU regulations and directives, a sophisticated corporate law, and the application of the highest standards in terms of financial supervision and investor protection.
A true focus on investors' needs, withexpertise spanning the entire financial services value chain, including cross-border fund distribution, sustainable finance, wealth management, insurance and reinsurance, payments, and leading capital markets infrastructure make Luxembourg the ideal location for international financial firms looking to do business globally from an EU hub.
Top 10 reasons: Why Luxembourg is your "best fit" European financial centre (Video/Audio YouTube)
Key activities
Major international banks serve European and global cross-border clients from Luxembourg, with a number of activities taking place in the Grand Duchy, includingprivate banking and wealth managementwhich have clear synergies withasset management and insurance activitiesundertaken in the country. Corporate finance services are a mainstay of Luxembourg's financial centre, building on the long-standing expertise that has developed in the country to serve companies operating internationally and facilitating foreign trade.
Luxembourg has been afirst mover in the internationalisation of the asset management industryover the last 40 years, which has led to the country becoming the world's leading cross-border asset management hub and the second largest fund hub globally after the United States. The credibility that Luxembourg funds have established goes far beyond the EU and the country brings everything together under one roof – an experienced regulator, international oriented management companies, highly skilled service providers and leading expertise. Luxembourg has become areference point for sustainable finance and is the world's leading sustainable investment fund hub.
Luxembourg's capital markets environment offers highly sophisticated infrastructure; from listing and trading, to clearing and settlement. TheLuxembourg Stock Exchange is a global specialist in the listing of international securitiesand has helped companies, institutions and governments access international capital markets for over 50 years. Furthermore,securitisation transactionsrepresent a critical component of Luxembourg capital markets, with transactions using a variety of asset types as collateral. The country has long been a pioneer in the field of capital markets, and remains so today, with ablockchain friendly capital markets legislationthat has attracted leading banks and supranational institutions.
The Grand Duchy has leveraged its cross-border expertise to act as a hub for foreign insurance companieslooking to provide their services across the EU. While traditionally focused on life insurance and reinsurance, post-Brexit the country has increasingly taken on an important role has a major European hub for non-life undertakings.
Sustainable Finance (Video/Audio YouTube)
International Renminbi Hub Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
Renminbi Hub Luxembourg
Key stakeholders
These partners will provide you with more information on the financial centre:
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Green Finance
Philanthropy
Blockchain
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/philanthropy.html
Philanthropy
Today, philantropists are often world citizens whose action extends to several countries. The high concentration of international legal, tax and financial experts are arguments that prompt the world's philanthropists to establish their foundation in the Grand Duchy. Since 2008, Luxembourg  has been openly displaying its determination to develop philanthropy  and sponsorship in the Grand Duchy.
The Luxembourg Foundation
TheLuxembourg Foundation('Fondation de Luxembourg') is Luxembourg's number one point of contact in the field of philanthropy, whether it is in terms of promoting education for all, development aid, social cohesion, biodiversity, research and health, or in terms of combating poverty and climate change.
Launched in late 2008 by the Luxembourg Government and the'Oeuvre Nationale de Secours Grande-Duchesse Charlotte', the Luxembourg Foundation has become akey player for everyone who wants to get involved in the philanthropic sector
Stimulating, facilitating and promoting philanthropic commitment
TheFondation de Luxembourgisactive nationally, in Europe and internationallyand offers potential donorspersonalised advice adapted to the various projects of general interest. The foundation'ssuccess stories include large-scale projects such as supporting social grocery shops and day centres in the Grand Duchy, and research into Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases at theLuxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine.
In orderto achieve its aim of promoting philanthropiccommitment, the Luxembourg Foundation offers advice and expertise to people who want to get involved in various philanthropic areas.
It also serves asan umbrella for funds with specific aimsand offers a range of personalised solutions for people and businesses wanting to commit themselves to a cause of general interest. As the foundations under its umbrella use the legal personality of the Foundation, they do not have their own legal personality. They nevertheless havethe same advantages as independentfoundations, but the creation process is considerably simplified.
Last update20.01.2025
Financial Centre: a leading cross-border financial centre with a unique offering
The Grand Duchy's key cooperation projects
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors/audiovisual-production.html
Audiovisual production
Although it is far from able to boast a long and rich tradition of national cinema, in recent years, the Grand Duchy has found its place in the international audiovisual industry. Proof of this is that a good number of (co-)productions have been awarded prizes at international film festivals.
The Luxembourg Government takes aproactive stance for the development of thenation's audiovisual services and communication. As an expression of this proactive policy, the Grand Duchy has adopted a number of public support schemes in the early 1990s aimed atpromoting the development of audiovisual production.
The film production sector
Despite the absence of a long tradition of national film production, the Grand Duchy has developed arich film production industry that has received recognition from the internationalaudiovisual industry, as evidenced by thenumerous prizes and awardsobtained at international festivals in recent years.
Professionalisation of the job has expanded the possibilities of co-production with other countries. As a result, the number of productions has increased considerably in the Grand Duchy, not only because of a favourable legal framework, but also because of the excellent technical infrastructures and the expanding skills of the local film production industry.
The animated films sector
The animated films sector has experienced a similar success the film production sector. The fact that the Luxembourgish co-productions 'Ernest et Célestine' (Studio 352) and 'Mr Hublot' (Zeilt Productions), were nominated for awards at the 86th season of Oscars in 2014 illustrates the distance the animation sector has covered in the Grand Duchy.
There are half a dozen animation studios active in the Grand Duchy. They either develop their own productions or co-productions or hire out their services to foreign productions. Support mechanisms for audiovisual production have worked perfectly as incentives in this sector, thereby helping to establish a genuine industrial platform at a very high level.
Filmland Kehlen
The Grand Duchy now has its own 'little Hollywood', atFilmland Kehlenin the western part of the country. This is aone-stop shop for audiovisual production, a real hub for national and international feature film production.
The infrastructure is  impressive: more than 4,000m2 of studios for filming, two construction workshops each with  an area of 400m2 each, 500m2 of production offices, sound and image editing studios, a final mixing auditorium, a calibration room, units for special effects, and equipment for green-screen filming. A number of Luxembourgish film production companies have pooled their activities there.
Support for the audiovisual sector
The Luxembourg Film Fund and the National Audiovisual Centre provide help and support to professionals working in the audiovisual sector.
National Support Fund for Audiovisual Production (Film Fund Luxembourg)
TheLuxembourg Film Fund, which  was created in 1990, supports theproduction, co-production and distribution of Luxembourgish works. The government's aim by creating the Film Fund was to promote the development of a genuine film industry.
The Film Fund supports Luxembourg's cinema through indirect grants called AFS (selective financial aid) for screenwriting and for developing and producing short and full-length films and documentaries. This aid constitutes an advance on income.
National Audiovisual Centre ('Centre national de l'audiovisuel', 'CNA')
The aim of theCNAis tocollect, restore, preserve and disseminate Luxembourg's national audiovisual heritage. As part of its production activities, the Centre supports the creation of documentaries and other audiovisual productions. It produces exhibitions and publications, and organises public events in the audiovisual field.
Last update03.09.2024
Technologies de l’information et de la communication
Artistic creation
Your business in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/sahar-niknam-chronopilot.html
ChronoPilot: Sahar Niknam explores the perception of time
Sahar Niknam completed an impressive journey before arriving in Luxembourg. From robotics engineering and philosophy of science in Iran to cognitive science in Germany, the young PhD student built her research focus around AI, a subject she feels very strongly about. Currently, the self-described 'AI rights activist' is however part of the University of Luxembourg's ChronoPilot team, an EU-funded project that seeks to find out how humans perceive time – and how that perception can be modified. And while Sahar arrived in Luxembourg by chance, she definitely doesn't regret the decision.
You are part of ChronoPilot, a EU-funded project that seeks to control the perception of time. What is the premise of this project?
The premise is common knowledge: humans perceive time in a subjective way. One minute could feel shorter or longer than the actual duration. For example, you are having fun hanging out with some friends, and one minute feels like almost nothing. But then imagine holding the plank position for one minute! Research in time perception shows that based on our physiological conditions (body temperature, heart rate, …), emotional states (being angry, being calm, …), and cognitive load (how deeply we are paying attention to something),we experience the same duration with different psychological lengths. ChronoPilot tries to make use of these and extend/compress human subjective time whenever required.
Which factors influence our perception of time?
Roughly speaking,at any given moment, we are consciously paying attention to something; it could be something that we are doing, the book we are reading, or simply a thought we are pondering.At the same time, parts of our brain are processing other information that we are unconscious of, such as the colors of the wall in the room or the radiator humming. Then we also have this other part of the brain which is taking care of time and is responsible for our time perception. Now if we put a lot of pressure on the conscious attention, for example, by engaging in a difficult task like mentally doing math, there wouldn't be enough space left for the unconscious and time attention. So, we probably wouldn't notice or later remember a lot of details about the place and similarly we would lose track of time.
The project's goal is to change time perception while people are doing whatever they are doing. So, what we can do is manipulate the unconscious attention. And for doing so, we are going to use diminished reality (to remove subconscious details from the environment), as well as augmented reality (to add subconscious details to the environment).
How does the use of technologies in our daily lives change our perception of time?
We are working on this answer. Because we want to use technology to modulate time perception; we are going to conduct experiments and we are going to apply stimuli, and then we want to 'observe' subjects' time perception to know whether our methods were successful in altering the perception of time or not.But we also speculate that the tech devices and gadgets that we are using in the project could affect time perception themselves.
We are aware of these possible effects. And we test the potential time perception interruption that our devices could cause in controlled experiments before using them for modulating time perception. And in fact, one of the five teams working on the ChronoPilot project is actively and parallelly involved in research on how we can alleviate the negative effects of technology in the workplace.
How does ChronoPilot measure perception?
We are using self-report questionnaires, i.e. people explaining their feelings about the passage of time in simple words or by estimating a duration in time units, e.g., how long did event X take during the experiment?.We also have a method known as 'time reproduction'; for example, you watch a bright dot on the screen appearing for n seconds and then you would be asked to press a button for the same duration.
Furthermore, especially in the VR/AR Lab at the University of Luxembourg, we have plans to find more objective and intelligent measurements of time perception. For example, pupil dilation; the more you are focused and engaged with a task, the wider your pupils get. On the other hand, we know that cognitive load is correlated with time perception. So, we hypothesize that pupil dilation could also indicate time perception.
There is only one complexity here: these signals influence each other. To solve this problem, we are going to use AI or, more specifically, neural networks andhopefully, the network will be able to find the complicated relations and map them to the way that a person is perceiving time.
How will the results of this project impact society?
ChronoPilot wants to provide people with a device so whenever they feel stressed by time pressure, they can slow down their perception of time and reduce the stress so they can use the time they have optimally. If the task is not very challenging, that makes you bored. And when you are bored, you get distracted easily, and you may fail at what you are doing. ChronoPilot wants to give people the control to speed up their perception of time in such cases to stay focused on what they are doing.
All this is on an individual level, but we can think of other benefits of active control over time perception. For example, when some people need to work with each other (or with robots, for that matter) and they have different paces, altering their time perception makes collaboration more comfortable.
Why is the University of Luxembourg part of this project?
My supervisorDr. Jean Botevis the head of the VR/AR Lab here and initiated this multidisciplinary project with some fellow researchers in Germany and Belgium, which developed into a sizeable EU-funded FET-Open project. This stands for Future and Emerging Technologies Open, which is a program under the Horizon 2020 framework aiming to support cutting-edge research and innovation.Despite its small size, Luxembourg attracts high-profile research, and the ChronoPilot project now involves partnering institutions from a total of six different European countries, including our research group.
Can you tell us a little bit about your career before coming here?
I got a BSc degree in robotics engineering in Iran, then I enrolled in anMSc programme in philosophy of science and fell in love with topics in philosophy of mind and AI. When I was writing my thesis on the possibility of 'real' AI, I got annoyed by baseless philosophical arguments against it made by people with no knowledge in computer science or neuroscience. So, I decided that instead of arguing with these people, I'm going to build a real AI and present it to them.
I spent a couple of years researching creativity because I believed (and still do) it is the only weakness of the machine depriving it of authenticity. Then I heard about good and free education in Germany, and I ended up in cognitive science. It was a wonderful MSc program that gave me more than I hoped for; I studied not only the basics of neuroscience, but I could bridge my background to computer science and AI. That made it possible for me to finally get into an actual computer science program for my PhD at the University of Luxembourg.
Which arguments in favour of Luxembourg did influence your decision to come here?
Honestly, I had no clue how Luxembourg was, and I did not care much.I found the ChronoPilot project very interesting, and the university gave me admission, and I am here now.
But to be fair, after living in Germany,I did not want to leave the Eurozone, because it is almost the intersection of all those beautiful unions and agreements which make borders irrelevant cosmetics on a map. Now some younger Europeans may not feel it because it is a norm for them, but as a citizen of a country with one of the least powerful passport(s) who can't even travel to all its neighboring countries without asking and paying for a visa, this is something that I fully appreciate as an honorable and majestic achievement for humanity.
Did you find these arguments confirmed?
Very much so!The intercultural dialogue and multilingualismwhich I perceived in Germany had a sharp contrast with what I'd experienced in Iran or even in the US city I was living in and made me fascinated with the idea of the European Union,I'm feeling it here in Luxembourg as well, only intensified.
How does the research environment in Luxembourg support you?
Ah, that's even more wonderful! Fully equipped labs with a supporting atmosphere that gives you the space for developing and testing your ideas.Before coming here, I studied at four universities on three continents, and I'd never been happier than now.However, to be completely fair, I owe a big part of my happiness here to Dr. Jean Botev, my supervisor. He gives his students the freedom to explore different research trends within their project framework and lets us work on what suits us better while keeping his support.
Sahar Niknam hails from Iran. After adegree in Robotics Engineering and an MSc in Philosophy of Science, she decided to continue her studies in the USA for anMSc in Creativityand then moved to Germany for anMSc in Cognitive Science.Her pursuit as an 'AI rights activist' is to create a conscious and fully functional AI and to debunk arguments against such a development. Sahar Niknam is currently enrolled in a PhD programme in Computer Science at the University of Luxembourg. In that context, she integrated the ChronoPilot team.
You describe yourself as an 'AI rights activist'. Which AI rights are you fighting for?
The AI's right to grow, to actualize their full potential, and when the time comes to be recognised as a conscious being. We are alarmist about AI becoming 'sentient' or gaining some levels of autonomy and prefer to have it developed just enough to be able to serve us. But why? Does a teacher sabotage their genius student's education because they are afraid that the student could become too powerful and use their power maliciously? No, the teacher makes some extra effort to work on the student's morals. So, what is different in the AI case if we know that it can thrive as a new, fully functioning species on our planet and even beyond?
Complete these sentences:
Sahar Niknam, thank you very much for taking the time to talk to us!
Editor's note: this interview was edited for the purposes of this article.
Last update24.03.2026
For more information
What can the MeluXina supercomputer do?
FNR Awards 2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/meluxina-superordinateur-utilisation.html
What can the MeluXina supercomputer do?
The Grand Duchy has acquired one of the most powerful supercomputers in Europe. This new machine is capable of processing large volumes of data and carrying out thousands of billions of operations per second. But what is the supercomputer actually used for and in which fields? Decoding.​
Karolina, Vega, LUMI and MeluXina are not names of cartoon characters, in fact they are names of supercomputers that all have something in common. They are superpowered and belong to the extended family of the company -EuroHPC. As a reminder, EuroHPC is a European supercomputer project based in the Grand Duchy.
The Luxembourg supercomputer is called MeluXina and its name echoes the famous myth of themermaid Melusina. It is used for research purposes as well as by companies and is installed at theLuxConnectdata centre in Bissen.
MeluXina's hideaway
Hidden from view, in a large room as clean as an operating theatre and surrounded with walls painted in white, a row of cabinets about ten metres long and over two metres high opens up to visitors. In the bowels of these metal containers, servers, storage disks and processors are stacked high, gently humming 24/7.
You've just had the honour of meeting MeluXina! Thecharacteristicsof this computer will make your head spin... With a maximum peak computing power of18 petaflops(corresponding to 18 million billion computing operations per second), it has an unbelievable computing capacity equivalent to that of over45,000 personal computers.It ranks among the top 50 HPCs in the world.
Daily tasks
The supercomputer can process huge volumes of data and carry out complex high-performance calculations (HPC), i.e. simulations dedicated to scientific challenges in the fields ofclimatology, engineering, aeronautics, automobile design, energy production, medicine or financial analysis.The computing power of MeluXina allows companies and research organisations (manufacturers, SMEs, start-ups, etc.) to access a wide range of services to implement high value-added HPC projects. At present,more than 200 companiesfrom 15 different economic sectors have already expressed their interest in using MeluXina.
The satellite operatorSES, the start-upRSS-Hydro, which specialises in environmental remote sensing, and the lunar exploration companyispaceare just some of the businesses that make use of the superpower of this computing colossus.
SES optimises the performance of its satellites
Access to MeluXina's capabilities fosters genuine advances in satellite and space innovation efforts. For the satellite operator SES, the use of the MeluXina supercomputer is particularly interesting foroptimising satellite performance and spectrum allocation.In other words, resources such as spectrum and transmission power must be constantly allocated in an optimal manner in order to maximise system performance.
Therefore, to enhance the performance of its satellites, SES has to use software systems based on complex algorithms and perform hundreds of tests before these new satellite systems become operational. These tests require high levels of computing power. Thanks to MeluXina, SES cantest various multi-orbit scenarios in real timeand easily overcome the limitations of conventional computing capabilities. As such, the computing power of the supercomputer makes it possible to generate the optimisation scenarios that enable SES to provide the best possible service to its customers.
MeluXina's services will thus be able toserve millions of users worldwidein every sector imaginable, such as telecommunications, internet services, business and energy, as well as connectivity on board ships and aircraft.
Did you know...
MeluXina isfully powered by green energyand is ranked in the top 15 of the 500 most powerful supercomputers in terms of energy efficiency.
ispace maps the shadows on the Moon
ispace is a lunar exploration company that is currently working on, among other things, amission to the polar regions of the Moonin search of frozen water. One of the key challenges of the polar environment is shadows. Unlike the Earth, the Moon has virtually no axial tilt. This means that at the poles, instead of having six months of light and six months of darkness, the sun seems to stay right on the horizon all year round.
Therefore, as the sun is so low in the sky, the shadows are very long and can move in a non-intuitive way. For the majority of rovers and other vehicles on the Moon, staying in the light is extremely important as the sun is their sole source of power. Therefore, in order to plan a successful mission, it isvital to be able to predict the location of the shadowsat any given time.
This is where MeluXina comes into play. ispace uses the mega-computer tocalculate the appearance of the lunar horizonwhen standing at any given point in the polar regions, enabling the company to develop real-time shadow maps of the lunar surface. Previously, it would take ispace about three minutes to map the shadows on the moon, now it takes microseconds. Furthermore, maps of average illuminance already exist, but they are of low resolution. Thanks to MeluXina, this type of map has become much more accurate.
A unique hub
LuxProvide S.Aand its 23 employees are responsible for the operation of MeluXina. In order to facilitate access to High Performance Computing (HPC) and to guide and support companies,Luxinnovation,the University of Luxembourgand LuxProvidejointly manage the National Competence Centre for high performance computing. The centre functions as a unique hub for companies by offering customised support and technical expertise to set up HPC projects, especially for companies with limited levels of skill in this area.
RSS-Hydro forecasts flooding
Globally, flooding is one of the most common forms of natural disaster. RSS-Hydro is active in this field and one of its key objectives is to providescientific flood risk mapsto users in order to assess prevention efforts.
In other words, RSS-Hydro uses MeluXina forflood management via remote sensing, i.e. the acquisition of remote information by satellites. With the help of the mega-computer, the company is able to optimise high-resolution simulations. Thanks to MeluXina, the speed and computational performance of its flood simulations has benefited from a tenfold increase, significantly improving the effectiveness and efficiency of its operations.
For its remote sensing calculations, it uses traditional methods and advanced machine-learning models, combined with the latest technological innovations in computer modelling tosimulate water-related hazards and their impact.Drones, satellites and, last but not least, MeluXina are part of working tools utilised by RSS-Hydro.
Last update07.02.2025
Meluxina: Luxembourg's new supercomputer
Autonomous driving forging ahead in Luxembourg
Mr Science or science for everyone
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/autonomous-driving-luxembourg.html
Autonomous driving forging ahead in Luxembourg
For the first time, an autonomous family car has weaved through traffic in Luxembourg. The demonstration, which took place in Kirchberg, is the culmination of five years of research by the 360Lab team at the University of Luxembourg. Technical research and legal developments will enable the transition from the current level of conditional autonomy to full autonomy in the future.
Artificial intelligence for a safer and more sustainable ecosystem
At the start of November 2022, the Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust (SnT) of the University of Luxembourg demonstrated its autonomous car in live traffic on the Kirchberg plateau. This vehicle is the test platform for navigation technologies and high definition (HD) maps which are currently under research at the360Lab of the SnT.
The car, a specially adapted electric Kia, was driven on a 3km circuit. It has state-of-the art technology, including a sensor to map the road in real time, an on-board computer with trainedartificial intelligenceand anHD map. In fact, HD maps are the foundation of autonomous navigation: they are exponentially more detailed than the standard definition (SD) maps used by traditional navigation systems in cars and smartphones currently on the market.
Démonstration voiture autonome 360Lab  (Video/Audio YouTube)
Three questions for... Prof. Dr. Raphaël Frank, director of the 360Lab
How did the autonomous driving test go? Did new avenues of research open up as a result of the demonstration?
The purpose of the event was to show our partners and the general public the various 360Lab projects focusing on intelligent mobility and, in this particular case, autonomous driving. As such, it was mainly anevent to showcase the progress of our researchas opposed to a purely scientific test. The test went smoothly and there were no major problems.
And yes, new avenues of research have opened up. This test mainly demonstrated an engineering project, but there are many small pockets of research linked to the autonomous car that 360Lab PhD students are already working on.
One of these areas of research is thedevelopment of highly detailed mapping. It is like a version of Google Maps for autonomous vehicles, which provides extremely precise data on the environment. This technology willconsiderably reduce the costs of this type of vehiclebecause it will no longer be necessary to have sensors, which are often very expensive pieces of equipment. The aim is to have a lot of data about the environment already available in the car or that can be downloaded via a mobile network, such as 5G. The purpose of this research is toensure that the mapping is always up to dateas well as to make sure that the information on the map corresponds to the reality on the ground. These different approaches are being studied at 360Lab.
How can autonomous driving deliver a safer and more sustainable mobility ecosystem?
We work on the principle that robots, and therefore the autonomous car, will be much safer than a vehicle driven by a human.
Looking further into the future, whencars are fully autonomous, we will no longer need manual driving (or significantly less). As such, thenumber of cars on our roads may be reduced considerably. This also means thatwe will not necessarily have to buy or own a car. Instead, it would be a mobility-on-demand service: there will be vehicles located everywhere and when you need to travel from point A to point B, you would be able to call upon a whole range of mobility options. It would follow a similar model to Uber - we will have mobile apps to book a ride and thesecars will pick us up and drive us autonomously to the destination of our choice. By using this approach, the aim is to use cars as much as possible and thus reduce the total number of cars on the roads. As a matter of fact, the majority of cars are just used for one hour a day and then sit idle for the rest of the day. Using this approach,we would be much more effectiveby embracing the idea of sustainability and safety based on robots.
Can autonomous mobility technologies be used in other areas of research? Do they have other applications in everyday life?
There is a huge potential for these applications. Much of the technology behind the autonomous car isperception-sensing technology: try to recognize what is around the car. I have already mentioned digital mapping, but this is only used for static objects, which do not move. But you also need sensors todetect moving objects around the car. For this, there are vision-based systems: for example, cameras which detect other cars and try to monitor them.These sensing technologies are already used in many artificial intelligence applications for image analysis. For example, if you enter a car park, there are now often cameras that will read the number plate and, when exiting the car park, the camera will automatically detect the number plate and open the barrier. And if you've already paid, you no longer need a ticket. That is one example, but there are thousands of others.Perception-sensing technology is already used in many fields.
All areas related to robotics, such as autonomous drones and the space industry already use very similar technologies.
Classification of autonomous driving
SAE Internationalis an international trade organisation that develops standards for the transportation industries, including aerospace, automotive and commercial vehicles. For the autonomous driving of vehicles, the SAE has established a widely acceptedclassificationof six levels of autonomy:
The 360Lab, dedicated to intelligent mobility
The360Labof the SnT of the University of Luxembourg is thefirst thematic research laboratory focusing on smart mobility. The purpose of the 360Lab is to serve as an umbrella for research projects sharing common equipment and complementary expertise to conduct strategic and collaborative research in the broader area of mobility innovation.
The fields of research of 360Lab include: autonomous systems, vehicle-to-everything communications (V2X), artificial intelligence for automated mobility, safety and resilience of automotive systems, mobility sensing, modelling and simulation technologies, as well as transport planning.
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
Top 5: Inventions and innovations made in Luxembourg
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Funding programmes of the Luxembourg National Research Fund
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/funding-programmes-luxembourg-national-research-fund.html
Funding programmes of the Luxembourg National Research Fund
The Luxembourg National Research Fund (FNR, in French) is the main funding body for research in Luxembourg. The institution invests public funds and private donations into research projects in various branches of sciences and the humanities, with an emphasis on core strategic areas. The FNR's financing instruments seek excellence and quality in research and support PhD students, projects and programmes which are assessed by independent scientific experts.
Types of funding
The funding mechanisms of the FNR focus on the institution's three strategic objectives: reaching scientific leadership in key sectors, making public research a competitive advantage for Luxembourg and anchoring science and research in society.
The FNR offers three main types of funding:
Most financing instruments involve the direct transfer of grants to the host institution, which is then responsible for administering the grant.
Key funding types
Staff funding
TheAFRis one of thelongest-running funding schemes of the FNRand now provides funding for the training ofPhD candidatesonly. Grants are awarded in the form of an employment contract with the host institution, rather than in the form of a scholarship. The AFR PhD scholarship scheme is divided into two sub-categories: AFR PhD in Luxembourg (AFR Incoming) and AFR PhD abroad (AFR Outgoing).
The purpose of the scheme known asIndustrial Fellowship(formerly AFR-PPP) is to promotecooperation between Luxembourg based companieswhich are active in research and development and public research institutions in Luxembourg or abroad. The scheme grants PhD and postdoctoral scholarships to researchers who carry out their PhD and/or postdoctoral training in collaboration with a company in Luxembourg. All scientific areas and researchers are eligible for the scheme, no matter what nationality they have. Partner companies must have a presence in Luxembourg.
Project funding
COREisthe FNR's core scheme. As a multi-annual thematic research programme, CORE's primary objective is to strengthen the scientific quality of Luxembourg's public research in the country's research priorities adopted by Luxembourg in 2019 (National Research and Innovation Strategy).
TheINTERprogramme is the FNR's main funding instrument to encourageinternational collaboration. Its aim is to give Luxembourg public research a higher profile in the international context by providing funding for international collaboration. Through INTER, the FNR can initiate bilateral or multilateral agreements for calls for projects in collaboration with other national or international funding bodies.
Programme funding
TheNational Centres of Excellence in Research(NCER) programme provides a structuring framework and funding instrument for clustering research excellence around a mission of significant societal interest, by promoting high-level transdisciplinary research and cross-sectoral collaboration. NCER projects schould becomeinternationally recognised models of best scientific practice, both in terms of research outcomes and impact and the way in which research is conducted.
As part of the National Research and Innovation Strategy, a limited number of NCER projects are planned to be launched in the coming years. These projects represent long-term investments (FNR funding for a maximum of eight years) within the framework of national research priorities and should be integrated into the Luxembourg research landscape as flagship projects.
Luxinnovation
The Luxembourg National Innovation Agency known asLuxinnovationgives companies the means to innovate today so that they are ready for tomorrow. It also contributes to the development of the economy as a whole, by identifying innovation opportunities and promoting collaborative innovation projects that act as a springboard for the development of a competitive, digital and sustainable economy.
Luxinnovation works in partnership with the FNR for certain funding instruments in order to create a link with Luxembourg companies. It is the case for three calls for projects:
FNR's evaluation & selection process explained (Video/Audio YouTube)
The selection process
Thetransparency of the selection processis of great importance for the FNR All candidates who submit proposals (successful or not) receive the results of the peer review and the panel's evaluation of their proposals.
Bearing witness to the importance the FNR places on transparency, a 2015 external evaluation of the FNR's selection procedure for the CORE programme found the procedure to be transparent, fair, impartial and unbiased. The principles of this selection process apply to all of the FNR's research funding schemes.
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
FNR Awards 2025
Mr Science or science for everyone
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/ecosystem-research-innovation-luxembourg.html
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Luxembourg has implemented a national research and innovation strategy. The objective is to create a society that fosters sustainable, diverse and digital know-how, and to build a better future. Throughout history, the Grand Duchy has always been a dynamic country that has managed to re-invent itself on numerous occasions. Following in the footsteps of its industrial heritage and its role as a leading global financial market, Luxembourg is gradually re-modelling itself as a centre of excellence in the field of innovative technologies and research. Shining a light on the current scientific ecosystem
The right place (Video/Audio YouTube)
A national research and innovation strategy
"...allow research to drive innovation in industry, services and the public sector."
In2020, Luxembourg launched anational research and innovation strategy. The objective is to establish the general framework to enable the scientific ecosystem to develop in a targeted manner and tomake Luxembourg a country where sustainable, diverse and digital knowledge can thrive within ten years.
The four main areas are as follows:
These four pillars are key factors in the societal, ecological and economic development of the country.
The strategy has also established the governance, coordination of policies and infrastructures, the anchoring of science in society and the necessary funding instruments.
Find out more about these issueshere.
The research centres and their facilities
"...strive to learn, explore and make an impact to create a better future."
The research sector in Luxembourg is composed of several institutions, partners and stakeholders. Together, they form a team that supports the development of a knowledge-based economy.
Here is a list of the main public institutions:
In just a few decades, Luxembourg has successfully built a competitive, innovation-driven research ecosystem. Research Luxembourg is a joint initiative of the main actors in Luxembourg public research that reflects the priority given to research and innovation by the country. It aims to promote scientific cooperation and activities of the research and innovation sector with one ambition: provide the best conditions to make excellence grow and shape a sustainable future.
Learn more onresearchluxembourg.org.
The research landscape in Luxembourg is highly attractive and flourishing. It benefits from a high level of international recognition thanks to its excellent infrastructure, which is made available to researchers, partners and companies and allows quality research to be carried out in the Grand Duchy. At present,more than 25 organisations ensure that science has an optimal environment to thrive in Luxembourg.
You can find a complete list of the research bodies and their locationhere.
Technology, cooperation and innovation
Innovation is a national priority. Luxembourg's research organisations are characterised by their openness to cooperation:
Find all the details and concrete exampleshere.
Being a researcher in Luxembourg (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update08.10.2025
For more information
Meluxina: Luxembourg's new supercomputer
Top 5: Inventions and innovations made in Luxembourg
Mr Science or science for everyone
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/mr-science-scientific-communication.html
Mr Science or science for everyone
Do you sometimes find it hard to understand the latest technical breakthroughs? From time to time, do you feel out of touch with scientific progress despite its impact on society? Scientific communication plays a major role in knowledge societies by bridging the gap between researchers and the general public. Aware of this challenge, the Luxembourg National Research Fund (Fonds national de la recherche, FNR) has created a whole series of mediation tools. Amongst the various initiatives aimed at a younger audience, Mr Science has become a genuine rock star!
Mr Science, the mediator between science and society
For almost 15 years, Mr Science has been sparking the public's enthusiasm in science. Between 2009 and 2021, he answered all sorts of wild and wonderful questions on hisscience show on Eldoradio, a local radio station that caters for young people. As for television, thePisa deWëssensmagazinprogramme is currently in its 14th season on RTL! The programme has a loyal following thanks to his reports and insight into physics, chemistry, biology and medicine. Havingbecome a familiar face with television viewers, he is also atrusted source for journalists. His influence doesn't stop there - he organisestraining courses for Luxembourgish school teachersand teachesscientific communication at the University of Luxembourg.
But who is this fictional character who has become a rock star on the Luxembourgish scientific stage?Joseph Rodesch is employed by theFNRand plays a key role for the institution. Through his mediation, he bridges the gap between the field of science and those unfamiliar with this fascinating world. With almost 15 years of experience under his belt, we will review his responsibilities and discuss the role of science communication in our society.
You studied chemistry in Aachen and then embarked on a career in scientific communication. What led you into this line of work? Did a specific event spark a desire to make science understandable for all, in particular young people?
Since I was a child, I have loved to do experiments - some of them quite dangerous.At secondary school, I became fascinated by chemistrybecause it helped me to embrace rationality andbetter understand the world around us. When I first took part in the Science Festival in 2003 as an intern, I discovered, together with a colleague, my passion for scientific demonstrations in front of an audience. Subsequently, the workshop manager (Montserrat Filella) gave us free rein to carry out all sorts of scientific experiments and events. After this first experience, the National Museum of Natural History hired us on several occasions for workshops and shows; we even went abroad, which fired up my interest even more…
The FNR considers public engagement an integral part of research, and the joint responsibility of research institutions and funding bodies. According to the institution, Mr Science is an important asset in nurturing the public's interest in science. In your opinion, why does scientific communication play such a vital role in our society?
There are more than 100 scientific mediators in Luxembourg. They focus on the most interesting discoveries in the field of science and present them in an understandable and often entertaining way to a wider audience. Firstly, it'shighly important for society, because it's the only way for non-scientists to understand the key issues. However, it's also important for researchers, because many of them do not have the time or the necessary know-how to transmit their discoveries to the uniformed general public. Scientific communication is the bridge which connects these two worlds.
You have been Mr Science for the past 15 years. Have you witnessed a change in the way science is perceived amongst young people?
Yes, absolutely. A lot has changed over the past 15 years. However, that's clearly not because of me!What gives me most pleasure is that the public's attitude to scientific communication has evolved. In the past, university professors were often of the opinion that science communication was a waste of time. However, most of them now appreciate its true potential and its importance for society.
The recent pandemic has shown us the need for effective scientific communication to an adult audience, as well as its ability to improve our understanding of major global events. In light of this situation, is the FNR introducing or planning specific scientific communication measures for the general public?
The pandemic has taught us that a scientific issue can suddenly become the focus of global attention and interest. It was also interesting to see that the scientific community as a whole was called into question in the public sphere. This has provided an opportunity to clarify what science can and cannot do, and to show that knowledge is never set in stone.Other major issues deserve the attention of the whole of society, such as climate change, energy transition, genetics, artificial intelligence, the working world, etc.The science.lu team closely follows all these topics, but it is difficult to predict whether a dynamic of interest comparable to that which we recently experienced will emerge.
To conclude, please could you share with our readers the most exhilarating experience that you have had as Mr Science?
Oh, there are so many! I can do something for the hundredth time and still find it fascinating. However, my favourite experiences are the ones where I took part in the experiment. If I had to pick one moment, it would bewhen I experienced a loop in an aircraft. I wanted to test if a glass of water could be held upside down in a loop without any water spilling out! From a purely physical perspective, it's nothing extraordinary, but when you're holding the glass of water while the plane performs the loop, it's a really cool experience. I regularly get to live such moments of pure joy in my line of work and I'm truly grateful.
Scientific communication at the University of Luxembourg
The University of Luxembourg also offersdoctoral training programmes in scientific communication: DESCOM (doctoral education in science communication). The course is open to Luxembourg doctoral students from all research-related disciplines. It offers them an introduction to the organisational structures of scientific communication and to key communication tools.
As part of DESCOM, the university also organises activities to raise awareness and encourage interaction between the university and the general public. For example,scientific cartoonsabout research in Luxembourg have been created by doctoral students and artists. LUX:plorations is the most recent and can be downloaded in English, French, German or Luxembourgish onsciencecomics.uni.lu.
Would you like to find out more about the basics of scientific communication? Please check thePocket guidepublished by DESCOM.
The University of Luxembourg's commitment to science communication demonstrates the extent to which it plays a key role in our societies, preparing all of us, whether mediators or the general public, to embrace the science-related issues facing society with greater understanding.
Science for curious minds - from 6 to 99 years: don't miss these amazing events!
The FNR co-organises two events which now play a vital role in popularising science in Luxembourg: the Researchers' Days and the Science Festival, which take place on an alternating basis.
This year on25 and 26 November 2022, it's theResearchers' Daysthat will take centre stage. This is your chance to enjoy a hands-on experience, to ask the questions that matter to you and to get a very real and personal insight into the world of research. The first day is exclusively reserved for secondary school students - the budding scientist of tomorrow; thesecond day is open to the public and entry is free. Several workshops have already been announced, therefore you can plan your visit depending on your field of interest: the climate crisis, artificial intelligence, robotics, missions to space and much more. The workshops are adapted to all ages (6 to 99)... you'll be spoilt for choice!
The next edition of theScience Festival, will take place in November 2023.
Researchers' Days 2018 - After Movie (Video/Audio YouTube)
When researchers meet the next generation of scientists
Since 2010, Researchers in schools ('Chercheurs à l'école'), have helped youngsters find out more about a profession that many are unfamiliar with. The FNR organises meetings during whichresearchers from all fields of science can explain the life of a researcher to students: from their initial academic career, to their interest in one or another scientific discipline, to the first steps into the professional sphere, to the subsequent career challenges and opportunities.For adolescents, it offers an ideal opportunity to ask the questionsthey have on their minds and to receive information on the advantages as well as any potential disadvantages of embarking on a career in science.
Look closer: What does it mean to be a researcher? (Video/Audio YouTube)
Last update28.10.2024
For more information
Top 5: Inventions and innovations made in Luxembourg
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Technological environment
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/top-5-innovations-inventions.html
Top 5: Inventions and innovations made in Luxembourg
When you mention Luxembourg, one conjures up images of the world of finance and economics. But this impression of Luxembourg is ill-founded, because the Grand Duchy offers a wealth of other assets, such as its innovative companies and their extensive expertise. Moreover, there is no shortage of ingenious ideas that first saw the light of day in Luxembourg, as history has demonstrated. That is why we have drawn up our Top 5 Luxembourg inventions that have shaped technical progress and our everyday lives. Spotlight on inventors and designers
Henri Tudor's accumulator
Henry Tudor was an engineer, inventor and industrialist. His name stands out in an era of progress in electrical science.
In fact, owing to the invention of his lead-acid battery, Henri Tudor became one of the pioneers in the field ofelectricity storage.  He built thefirst accumulatorin the worldto store and distribute electrical energy.
However, you will claim that it was the FrenchmanGaston Plantéwho invented the first rechargeable lead acid battery in 1859. And you are correct! The design was improved upon by the electro-chemistCamille Faurein 1881. However, in practice this battery did not function properly as short-circuits were frequent. Therefore, it was a commercial failure.
Henry Tudor, who was also interested in electricity and the issues associated with its storage, looked for a solution to this problem. As a student, he transformed the experimental model created by Planté and Faure. In 1881, he finally managed to perfect a system to store electrical energy using a lead accumulator. This resulted in a combined device - a generator and accumulator. In contrast to Planté's invention, Tudor's device produced a constant and regular electrical current. As such, the first Tudor accumulator was born. It worked for 16 years without interruption.
After having patented his invention, Henri Tudor and his brother Hubert were able to convince the authorities in Echternach to replace the oil lamps with electric lamps. Thus, in 1886, a whole city in Luxembourg was illuminated by electrical power.
His achievement earned him a reputation outside of the Grand Duchy and made it possible touse electricity to light up streetsthroughout Europe. In order to manufacture the equipment necessary for this project, the two brothers and their cousin Nikolas Schalkenbach opened a modestfactory in Rosport. At the time of his death, 25,000 people were working in Henri Tudor's factories.
At present, environmentally friendly mobility powered by electricity has become part of our daily lives. Moreover, it is thanks to Henri Tudor's invention that the epicelectro-mobilityadventure has become an ever-present reality. In fact, the creation of the car of tomorrow is directly linked to the manufacture of rechargeable batteries developed by an inventor from the town of Rosport!
The Tudor museum
A museum dedicated to work andthe inventions of Henri Owen Tudoris located in the former home of the inventor in hisRosport manor house. He lived in this building until passed away in 1928. His death was attributed to severe lead poisoning as a result of his research work. The Tudor museum presents the world of electricity and the battery in an illuminating way.
William Justin Kroll's soft titanium
You may not be familiar with the Kroll procedure. However, it is due to this technique that anew stage in the evolution of the steel industrywas created. The man behind this industrial revolution is one of Luxembourg's greatest innovators - the metallurgist William Justin Kroll, who was born in November 1889 in Esch-sur-Alzette.
Even today, a wide range of scientific, technical and technological developments owe a great deal to this man. In 1932, he invented anindustrial process for extracting titanium from calcium and titanium tetrachloride.In other words, he perfected the production of a consistent and corrosion-resistant soft titanium metal.It was a revolutionary discovery and is now found in a wide range of construction and engineering products and processes, including components in aircraft, boats, cars, tennis rackets, jewellery and even surgical implants.
Following hisrevolutionary innovation, he began to produce titanium on an industrial scale in Bereldange in 1938. He emigrated to America in 1940 in order to escape the wave of Nazism sweeping across Europe.
On the other side of the Atlantic, he further honed his manufacturing process, first at Union Carbine and then as a consulting metallurgist for the Bureau of Mines. The industrial-scale manufacturing of titanium opened the door to large-scale commercialisation. The US military, in particular the US Air Force, was particularly interested in the advantages of titanium-based alloys for the development of jet engines.
Hugo Gernsback, the 'Father of Science Fiction'
It is true that his name is not familiar to most ears, but nevertheless, we owe a lot to Hugo Gernsback (formerly Gernsbacher), who was born in August 1884 in Bonnevoie. He attended the "École industrielle et commerciale" in Luxembourg in 1896 before moving to Brussels two years later. In 1904, at the age of 20, he left Europe for the United States, and changed his name to Gernsback. In 1906, heinvented the wireless telegraph, which was theorigin of the walkie-talkie.
In addition, he founded ascience fiction publishingempire. His publishing houses were home to more than 50 newspapers, illustrated magazines, humorous journals, weeklies and monthlies devoted to technology and popular science.
In 1929, hecoined the phrase "science fiction"in the preface of the Science Wonder Stories magazine and wrote a series of stories and novels in English in this literary genre.
Also, he made major contributions to the growth and development of modern science fiction as a writer, editor and critic. He founded the Science Fiction League and since 1953 it has awarded the best American science fiction stories with the famousHugo prize. In 1960, he was awarded this prize which is named in his honour.
Source: autorenlexikon
Glass manufactured in Luxembourg rises high in Dubai
In Dubai, one architectural feat outshines another. Among all these spectacular buildings, one truly stands out on the skyline: theBurj Khalifa. This magnificent edifice, which soars high in the Middle Eastern sky, reaches 828 metres, making it thetallest building ever built.
Since its inauguration in January 2010, the Burj Khalifa has almost stolen the limelight from all the other buildings and monuments in this desert city in the Emirates. At 1.5 billion dollars, not only does the cost of construction seem mammoth in scale, the technical specifications also make the eyes water:160 habitable floors, 57 lifts and a surface area of 310,000 m2. And that's not all, this silver, spiral-shaped rocket-like building is covered withseveral kilometres of glasswhich reflects the sky across its outer shell.
This is where Luxembourg know-how comes to the fore! Did you know that the windows of this giant structure were built by a company based in Bascharage calledGuardian Luxguard S.A.? The Luxembourg manufacturer was chosen to supply the600,000m2of low-emissivity glass for the 206-storey Burj Khalifa Tower.
The experts at Guardian were able to develop a type of glass which could withstand the extreme height and temperatures. According to Guardian, the pressure generated by the difference in height and temperature can cause deflections in the glass. Thus, the glass for the Burj Khalifa was produced at a temperature of 26 degrees and installed in Dubai at a temperature of 48 degrees. Also, the solar panels, which filter almost all of the sun's energy, are also designed to withstand high winds of up to 250km/h.
Prefalux builds a polar station
This research station is situated at an altitude of 4,000 metres. The weather conditions are extreme and temperature range from -50 to -80 degrees Celsius. Welcome to theBelgian Princess Elisabeth polar station in Antarctica!When researchers and scientists brave the elements in this inhospitable region, it is because they have an important mission to fulfil: to research the glaciers. They come here to collect data in order to assess the melting rates of ice, as it has a direct effect on the rise in sea levels.
It was in 2008 that the dream of building a scientific base at the South Pole to study the melting ice became reality thanks to the efforts ofthe explorerAlain Hubertwith the support of the Baudouin Foundation. One of the principles behind this unique construction project was to use environmentally friendly renewable energy.
But the stakes were high as polar stations are known to be energy-hungry. However, this new station would consume only 20% of non-renewable energy.
The International Polar Foundation entrusted this mission to the Luxembourg construction firm Prefalux. It was tasked with developing, manufacturing and building the wooden frame of the structure, as well as the outer walls on the facade and the roof, and assembling all these parts in Antarctica.
Needless to say,building a 700m2, zero-emissions polar station, is no easy task.  It was a real race against time, as assembly had to be completed in a short time frame of between six weeks and two months. After this point, the deteriorating weather conditions would prevent any further work from being carried out.
The wooden frames and the entire cladding of the polar station were manufactured in record time in theJunglinster factories. Subsequently, the Prefalux teams carried out a test assembly in Brussels in September 2007. The station was then transported by ship to Antarctica, where it was assembled over a period of 10 weeks between December 2007 and March 2008.
It was no doubt a major challenge for Prefalux to accept and deliver a project of this complexity, however in the end the Luxembourg company has gained a lot of prestige in this field and the gamble ultimately paid off. Today, the station can host around 20 scientists.
For this incredible achievement, the Prefalux teams were awarded theTrade Innovation prize in 2008. The project is called "Wood in the eternal ice".
Last update07.02.2025
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Industry in Luxembourg: a sector on the move
Craft business at a digital crossroads
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/moai.html
MOAI.lu
The building sector is changing rapidly. In addition to new technologies, there is an increasingly complex legal and regulatory framework, the challenges posed by digitalisation as well as the expectations of the main contractor - all these factors must be taken into account and dealt with. That is why the Order of Architects and Consulting Engineers (OAI) has implemented the 'Maîtrise d'oeuvre OAI' (MOAI.LU) methodology. It offers an innovative and holistic approach: from the initial stages of a building project, it brings together the whole team which designs and manages the project until its final delivery. Its objective is to lay the foundations to ensure satisfied contractors and allow the industry to showcase its expertise: to reconcile the interests of the main contractors with those of the users and our shared living environment while ensuring a smooth operational process with the public authorities and the companies on site.
MOAI.lu: transforming the way we build
Launching a construction project, irrespective of it size,can require up to 1,300 administrative procedures, depending on the complexity of the project and the number of stakeholders– a daunting number! Added to this are the sheer complexity of construction projects and the increase in the number of stakeholders and parties involved in these projects, especially with regard to the complexity and the legal, regulatory and technical framework in force.
As such, the requirements in terms of energy efficiency, accessibility, building biology, health and well-being, the circular economy and digitalisation, among others, must be respected by the main contractor.
In view of these challenges, the OAI has launched the'Maîtrise d’oeuvre OAI' (MOAI)methodology; a tool based on a consultative approach that relies on the cooperation of all stakeholders in the construction industry in order to overcome, from the start, any obstacles that may arise during project.
To achieve this goal, the OAI can take advantage ofthe close ties amongst these actors in Luxembourg, as well as easy access to political decision makers, who are also key stakeholders in a construction project. The purpose of the approach is to create a genuine coordinated service culture in the industry in order toincrease efficiency, productivity and reliability.
A holistic approach based on transparency and the exchange of information
The MOAI method aims to be holistic in its approach. It is therefore applied from the initial stages of a project's design phase and remains in play through to completion. It also intendsto bring together all project stakeholdersand ensure they are involved in its procedures, in order to confront the challenges - at an early stage and as a team - that may affect the overall success of the project. As such, MOAI.lu is acommunication tool as well as a source of innovation aimed at accelerating the transition to sustainable construction and the circular economy.
Its true strength lies in its versatility: the MOAI is equally attuned to building developments per se, whatever the size of the project, as well as to urban planning and landscaping projects.
Basically, the MOAI of a construction projectbrings together the main contractor, the architect and consulting engineers to better coordinate the planning and execution of a project. Other stakeholders may also be part of this team, depending on its scope and the type of project.
Effective communication is vital to the success of building project. To achieve this goal, the OAI has created the necessary tools to ensure constant exchanges between the stakeholders.The fact sheets which summarise the best practices and regulations in forceare used as a basis for the MOAI meetings and ensure that theproject progresses in a fully transparent mannerthus aiding the main contractor. Furthermore, an online forum ensures that these tools are constantly evolving and remain adapted to on-site realities.
Digital planning creates opportunities
TheBuilding Information Modeling(BIM) is another vital component of this approach. Software allows the stakeholders to plan and follow the construction in real time. Set up by the Centre de ressources des technologies et de l’innovation pour le bâtiment (CRTI-B), this tool allows3D digital modelsto be exchanged, thus facilitating the transfer of information, communication and allowing for potential problems to be identified and resolved. It is therefore both a digital planning tool and a communication platform for stakeholders.
This is the path chosen by the OAI torender construction projects more transparent and efficientand to tackle the challenges linked to digitalisation and technological progress. The principle of consultation, which enjoys a long-standing tradition in Luxembourg, makes the MOAI a key planning tool as well as a platform for the collaborative development of an entire sector of the Luxembourg economy.
Last update11.09.2024
For more information
Energy Efficiency
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/letzshop-commerce.html
Letzshop, the local shop that's just a click away
Letzshop, the online retailer, has developed rapidly since its launch in 2018. Its growth continued during lockdown with sales figures which literally skyrocketed, much to the delight of the online retailers! Decoding the success.
A warm welcome awaits you in this stylish shop dedicated tothe world of tea on the rue Notre-Damein Luxembourg city. For 20 years,Josée Letsch, supported by her three employees, has given pride of place to teas from the four corner of the globe. White tea, green tea, yellow tea, black and oolong teas as well as plain or flavoured teas, herbal teas, fruit infusions, rooibos and honeybush, and so much more. It goes without saying, there is a large and diverse range of teas on offer.
But, not so long ago, things started to turn sour for Josée Letsch. Her shop (TeeGschwendner), which is well established, was suffering from the effects of the health crisis. Due to the pandemic, she could no longer welcome her customers in her shop. Fortunately, in 2018, she had the good sense to join theLetzshopplatform, the marketplace for local retailers. A choice which she didn't regret; in fact, it was her saving grace. Since the start of the pandemic in March 2020, her orders have risen sharply."With the onset of the pandemic, my orders increased rapidly. On top of our existing customers, we added new customers. We went from three order per week to 75 per week!", she revealed during a recent interview.
TeeGschwendner
Josée Letsch takes you on a journeyacross the five continentsof the world with her wide range of teas available from her tea emporium in the heart of the capital. As well asa varied assortment of teas, the shop also offers accessories such as teapots, cups, kettles, filters and sweets to soften the taste of this drink that can be slightly astringent.
>>>TeeGschwendner on Letzshop
Maggy Fantini, the beginning of a new chapter The owner of thePromoculturebookshop, was, in her own words, more or less born with a book in her hands. Her business also witnessed a change in customer habits and an increase in online sales during the health crisis."The book ‘Aläert, jauwen, Zockerboun – 123 Pärelen aus der Lëtzebuerger Sprooch’ sold close to 200 copies", she declares proudly. Moreover, she points out that her business posted a5% increase in salessince she registered on Letzshop.
e-commerce, the real winner
Everything seemed to go well for retailers on Letzshop during the pandemic. While brick-and-mortar stores were forced to close during lockdown, the platform gave them the opportunity to continue selling goods via theelectronic platform. And the outcome is highly impressive. Retailers and shoppers immediately flocked to Letzshop; the number of orders rose sharply and sales soared.
Online sales growth on Letzshop reached levels not seen since its launch in 2018, as evidenced by thefigures. Since the start of the crisis, the website recorded a1,434% increase in ordersin 2020 as compared to 2019. Last year, turnover rose 803% compared to 2019 for local shops.
Promoculture bookshop
Since 1972, thetechnical and scientific bookshophas offered a wide range of works specialised in various fields, such as management, medicine, history, architecture and computing, etc. Also, the bookshop run by Maggy Fantinispecialisesintaxation and Luxembourg and European law. In her bookshop, you’ll find books aimed at the general public with topics ranging from science to international literature through to personal development, health and DIY.
>>>Promoculture bookshop on Letzshop
Promoting local business
For the beekeeper,Yannick Kihm, better known asBeiefritz, the health crisis proved to be the ideal opportunity to give his online sales a boost. He has been a member of the Letzshop since 2019 and his sales have been buzzing since the start of the health crisis in March 2020."At the start of the pandemic, my client numbers were increasing", he stated."At the moment, they are falling, however, they are still better than when I first signed up to Letzshop".
He has a highly positive impression of the Luxembourgmarketplace."The structure of the website is highly intuitive, you can find all sorts of items and have them delivered to your doorstep".But the biggest asset of the website is evident - it supports and promotes the local economy, says the beekeeper. Letzshop offers a wide range of products and the goods on offer are growing by the day. In total, thewebsite has 387,870 products online, of which2,270 products are "made in Luxembourg"by 72 local retailers.
A prosperous beginning
In total, the website hosts500 retailersand their range of goods. From the point of view of the managers of Letzshop, they remain confident about the development potential of the platform. And for good reason, Letzshop is barely three years old and its success is already outstanding.
This impression is shared by the retailers on the website. In their eyes, there are numerous advantages to be gained by this platform. It offers a virtual window withhigh levels of exposureand the service provided by the supplier is second to none!
De Beiefritz
The young beekeeper Yannick Kihm creates his own unique blend oftradition and modernity. On his online shop, you'll find"Lëtzebuerger Hunnegdrëpp"(a liqueur with honey) made according his ownsecret recipe, as well as a beer with honey, similar to the American Golden Ales, with pure honey made by local bees! He also produces handcrafted soaps with certified organic oils, Luxembourg oils and Luxembourg honey. No product is the same as the next! But he's keeping hisbiggest secretunder wraps... for the time being. New products will be on the market soon, watch this space!
>>>De Beiefritz on Letzshop
At present, it's a case of inspiring others. Josée Letsch, who does not have her own website for her tea shop, urges other retailers to knock on Letzshop's door in order to give their products a boost. Initiations go hand-in-hand with the ambitions of the platform's coordinators, who want to help local retailers incorporatee-commerceinto their daily lives, so that they can continue to offer consumers access tostrong and prosperous local businesses.
In this win-win relationship, retailers are not paying subscription fees at the moment due to the unprecedented situation created by the health crisis"Having a shop window on Letzshop offers me a high level of customer exposure. You have to take advantage of this opportunity. In my case, it's profitable", Josée Letsch concedes, adding that running her own website would be much more expensive.
Obviously, a presence on Letzshop is priceless!
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
Guichet.lu: the virtual gateway to public administration.
Shopping in Luxembourg - You'll be spoilt for choice
Craft business at a digital crossroads
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/crafts-trades-digitalisation.html
Craft business at a digital crossroads
Digitalisation has become a reality in wide range of craft trades. While some can longer imagine a working day without using digital tools, others have not yet begun this technological transition.
However, digitalisation is a major game-changer and offers numerous benefits for a company in terms of work processes and management. In 2019, theChamber of Skilled Trades and Craftsconducted asurveyamong its members. It revealed that many companies are betting on digital, even though they remain cautious.
Social networks soaring
Despite the fact that craft businesses are adopting more and moredigital communication tools, there is still progress to be made. While 76% of craft business have a website, it is mainly large companies, especially those in the communications (89%) and mechanics (81%) sectors that have a presence on the Internet. At first sight, this figure may seem large, but there is still a significant amount of work to be done according to the Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts in its report. And for good reason, as this figure has barely changed since 2017; in fact, it has even declined slightly in the meantime.
Actually, thenumber of websiteshas declined marginally in favour ofsocial networks, where we have witnessed the increased presence of craft businesses. Facebook is the most popular network with 92% of craft sector business opting for this platform, followed by Instagram and LinkedIn. Food (74%) and fashion, health and hygiene (73%) sectors are the most represented on social networks.
According to a survey by the Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts conducted in 2019, craft businesses are still not making sufficient use of the vast possibilities offered by the various digital tools available on the market. However, the data shows that the efforts over the last two years have paid off.
Digital tools: more decisive action needed
Fifty percent of businesses have already usedmobile applicationsin their day-to-day activities, but they are using these tools in moderation. The study reveals that craft businesses are not yet embracing the huge potential offered by the various digital tools in existence.
In reality, many employers among the1,053 questionedare not yet representative of the typical 4.0 craftsman, with each business adapting at their own pace: only a third of companies have implemented remote access, the digital capture of their employee's time accounts or geolocation of their fleet and tools. This number is even smaller when it comes to digital inventory management (26%) and in terms of the administration of theirGoogle my businessaccount (25%). Zero-paper companies remains a distant reality, with only third of those questioned using electronic invoicing.
While a large number of businesses (84%) carry out theirbanking transactions online, the majority do not use the government platformguichet.lu(32%), which would enable them to process a significant amount ofadministrative procedures virtually.
A lot of work ahead
In comparison with the 2017 survey, digital tools are becoming more commonplace but have yet to become widespread in the industry; the situation is similar for digital production processes (CNC machines, 3D printing, robots, etc.).
One reason for this delay could be thelack of digital skillsto bring about a change in the company. After all, only 45% of businesses (38% in 2017) revealed that they had these type of skills available. This figure varies according to thesize of the business; 75% of the businesses with more than 250 employees report that they have these type of skill-sets in their company. The communications sector has the highest level of digital skills (67% of businesses).
Companies' knowledge in terms ofcybersecurityanddata protectionhave changed a great deal in recent years, but there remains a significant amount of work to be done.
Craft businesses are surfingthe digital wave! Fully conscious of the challenge that lies ahead, craft businesses have made major strides in the digital transition compared to previous years. Their progress is still hampered by a sense of hesitancy but the will to adopt digital tools as part of their daily activities is clearly evident.
We contactedthree employerswho have taken a leap of faith in terms ofdigital transformation. And their efforts have begun to bear fruit!
Menuiserie Kraemer - the digital carpentry workshop
While some companies have not yet embarked on the journey to digitalisation, others have lead the way in digital transition over recent years. Menuiserie Kraemer is one business that has embraced the digital age, as revealed byPatrick Elsen, Managing Partner.
Actually, digitalisation began in the carpentry workshops a few years ago. As a result of the digitalisation ofproduction processes, the company has witnessed a20% increase in efficiencyand productivity, explains Patrick Elsen. The error rate is much lower because the operators receive better information, he stated.
Since the carpentry businessdigitalised its workshops, all the machines have been connected to each other and to the control station. Tablets have replaced paper and the cutting sheets move faster from the office to the CNC machine. 'Before the digital age, the manufacturing of our products such as doors, stairs or furniture was much more tedious', declaredPatrick Elsen, 'because the plans were printed, then coded before being sent to the workshops'.
Even from anadministrative perspective, digitalisation has led to the optimisation of the company's organisation and efficiency.
Menuiserie Kraemer (Video/Audio)
Miroiterie Origer
For the past few years,Raoul Origer, the director of the eponymous mirror manufacturerhas employedtablets and robotsas his co-workers. It all started with designing an app to enable him to better manage staff, such as recording the entry and exit of its employees digitally, monitoring their activities and providing them with increased levels of mobility.
Since that day, the company, which mainly produces windows, facades and doors, has picked up the pace of its digital transformation and is gradually working towardspaperless carpentry. 'Our goal is to achieve a fully digital manufacturing process - from client orders to payment', such is Raoul Origer's belief in its benefits.
The elimination of paper has already proved successful in the workshops. Manufacturing plans, assembly sheets and other documents that used to be on paper now exist in digital format only.
Digitalisation has also been adopted on theassembly line:product design and manufacturing as well as the interconnections between the different production stations have been digitised. Similar to an automobile assembly line, pieces of wood pass through 12 to 15 stages before being completely assembled.Tactile screensare used at each stage of manufacturing; they serve as a guide for the operators while providing the information necessary for each piece and apply a barcode to each item.
According to the boss of Miroiterie Origer, digital technology manages90% of administrative tasks. Raoul Origer indicates that the benefits have been significant, despite the financial investment. From his point of view, digitalisation has provided more transparency, and optimised organisation and efficiency as well as increasing output.
Raoul Origer aims to go one step further. In order to manage the sites more effectively, the assembly teams will also benefit from digitalisation. 4.0 innovative artisans step this way!
Veiner Weissert
ForGil Roger, the digital transition began two years ago with the Fit 4 Digital programme. Despite thehuge financial outlay in terms of investment,he is pleased with his decision to take a digital leap of faith. From his point of view, digitalisation is no longer an option but an obligation for any business aiming to secure its long-term future.  'If a company wants to survive, it must embark on its digital journey', he claims.
In his opinion, the first step in the digital transition isopen communication with the company's personnel. Access to the specifications and architectural plans is made solely via tablets. The same applies to order forms and deliveries; all these processes are carried out digitally.
Veiner Weissert - painting goes digital (Video/Audio YouTube)
He also affirms that the management of staff has benefited greatly from digitalisation. For example,team managementhas been considerably streamlined.
Prior to digitalisation, the 16 teams (consisting of 35 persons) met each morning in the offices before heading to the respective sites. 'Currently, site planning is managed via tablets. The workers now just travel directly from home to their place of work (and vice-versa). They no longer need to come to the office to receive their list of tasks from me. In addition, I have a site-by-site overview; I know exactly where each employee and machine is located at any given time', he explains.
If digitisation is a genuine blessing for Gil Robert, it is also thanks tothe efficiency of his ERP software(enterprise resource planning). All documents are centralised, the procedures are meticulously managed and each action easy is to track.'Nothing gets lost',he declares. He added that the only downside of his digitalisation system would be the elevated investment cost.
However, the icing on his digital cake is the3D planning and visualisation program;all the craftsmen from the different trades have access to this program when planning site works. The plumber, electrician, carpenter, painter and many others trades can create a complete virtual turnkey construction on a tablet before presenting it to the customer.
Last update03.02.2025
For more information
Training in the skilled crafts sector
Art and craft trades
Annen Plus - modern architecture has a name
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/guichet-houtsch.html
Guichet.lu: the virtual gateway to public administration.
Do you need a fishing licence or do you want to apply for a family allowance? It's so easy! Just knock on the door of Guichet.lu - the virtual gateway to the Luxembourg public administration.
The Government Portal makes it easier to deal with administrations and public institutions and provides an initial answer to all types of questions. Essentially, it puts users on the right path when dealing with administrative procedures. The most frequent requests include applications for financial aid for higher education and requests for criminal records.
Quick and easy access
Owing to itsclear and straightforward layout, access to administrative information and services is just a click away! The home page immediately gives you an insight into its user-friendly design: here is one platform for citizens, one for businesses and a secure MyGuichet platform. Each interface points the user in the right direction.
In order to offer a more dynamic experience to users, each section is accompanied bypictogramswhich are accessible to all. Like Ariadne's thread, the web surfer receives support and guidance throughout the search process.
Awell-defined tree structureleads the applicant to the relevant information. These pages set out the details regarding the persons concerned, the conditions to be met, the steps to be taken, the deadlines, the practical details relating to the applications as well as the contact organisations and their addresses.
TheMyGuichet secure platformallows you to check your personal data recorded by the administration, download official documents and administrative forms. Thanks to thepersonal and secure accessto the digital services of the Luxembourg State, you can carry out your administrative procedures online.
The 'Guichet accueil'
A support service and information help-desk is available to advise citizens on administrative procedures. It is located in the city centre next to the cathedral.
A popular vade mecum
Guichet.lu also providesseveral useful toolssuch as a rent subsidy simulator or housing subsidies. It also allows you to download forms for administrative procedures and offers information on training courses.
In addition, in the news section, the portal regularly provides reports on all thelatest news concerning public services, including decisions, new support measures, publications and events.
The official site of the administration is accessible 24/7. It is available to all citizens, individuals and professionals searching for information. Guichet.lu is available inthree languages(French, German and English). In normal times, it has around570,000 unique visitorseach month.
In 2019, approximately 553,000 procedures were carried out online. During the COVID-19 health crisis, the number of online applications rose significantly. More than2 million procedureswere submitted via MyGuichet.lu in 2020.
Since its launch, the Guichet.lu portal has enjoyed increasing success. In the future, new technologies will improve the accessibility and the use of the public administration platform. Overview with Patrick Houtsch, director of the CTIE and manager of the Guichet.lu website.
1. What was the original idea behind the launch of Guichet.lu?
Guichet.lu went online for the first time in 2008. Its objective was to provide both citizens and businesses with an online platform containing all the information on the procedures and services offered by the State. The intention was to create a common platform for both target groups.
The main advantage of Guichet.lu is that any user looking for information does not need to know in advance which administration or public authority to contact. The search is therefore carried out depending on the user's personal 
situation (and the type of request being made) and not, as is common 
practice, according to the responsibilities of each respective 
administration or public institution.
2. Which services are available via Guichet.lu?
Guichet.lu offers quick and user-friendly access to all the information, procedures and services offered by Luxembourg’s public institutions. It therefore helps citizens and businesses alike to carry out a wide range of formalities with administrations and public authorities.
Guichet.lu also offers:
The MyGuichet.lu service - the interactive Guichet.lu platform - which is also developed by the State Information Technology Centre (CTIE), is a package of online services helping to simplify the user's administrative procedures with the State and municipal administrations, and with certain public institutions. It allows users to complete, send and monitor procedures online and to consult the authentic sources made available on the platform.
Authentic source is the term used to refer to data held by administrations on citizens. As such, citizens can view and check their own data and use it in order to complete online procedures. For example, users can consult data from the National Register of Natural Persons, their driving licence or vehicles registered in their name.
The eDelivery feature offered by MyGuichet.lu allows certain official documents to be received in electronic format in the user's private space, such as reimbursement details sent by the CNS or certain documents drawn up by the Caisse pour l'avenir des enfants (CAE) in the framework of parental leave.
It is ... essential that access to this data is protected by the highest levels of security.
Patrick Houtsch, director of CTIE
3. How do you ensure that the procedures are secure?
As previously stated, MyGuichet.lu not only provides citizens and businesses with the option to carry out procedures online, it also enables users to check and correct data held by administrations. Moreover, users can also have certain documents issued to them in electronic format.
It is therefore essential that access to this data is protected by the highest level of security. This is why the CTIE has implemented a strong authentication process. Users must first confirm their identity via their LuxTrust product or electronic identification before gaining access their personal space. This is the same procedure implemented by banks for eBanking services. Therefore, users can utilise the same product for their banking transactions and their communications with the State.
4. Which services are most frequently used on the Guichet.lu platform?
One of the most frequently used services on MyGuichet.lu is the online appointment booking service for certain administrations and public institutions (e.g. the National Health Fund (CNS), the Guichet offices, etc.). The Guichet.lu platform provides all the necessary information on how to book an appointment.
User demand for this service has increased considerably during the pandemic. For example, MyGuichet.lu enables residents and cross-border residents to make appointments for COVID-19 testing as part of the Large Scale Testing.
5. How would you assess the success of Guichet.lu?
I think the success of Guichet.lu can be attributed to three factors.
Firstly, Guichet.lu has established itself as the main web platform; it provides information on all the steps that can be taken with public authorities in Luxembourg. Surveys have shown that the overwhelming majority of citizens and businesses are aware of Guichet.lu and use it regularly if they need to contact Luxembourg State institutions. As such, we are also well referenced on search engines; even Internet users who are not aware of Guichet.lu are often redirected to us.
Secondly, the information has been available in three languages for many years. We were one of the first State websites to offer a comprehensive service in French, German and English, which has obviously broadened our audience in the country and beyond its borders.
Thirdly, I dare say that we have a very good relationship with the administrations that offer the procedures. They provide us with everything we need to offer up-to-date and high-quality information. As part of editorial guidelines, we ensure that all procedural descriptions are proofread by the relevant administration before publication.
6. What does the future hold in terms of new services, instant messaging, etc.?
Besides the obvious fascination with new technologies and the solutions they offer, we must not lose sight of the fact that the web also makes it possible to use technology for the benefit of people with disabilities. By ensuring that websites are adaptable to all types of tools (such as screen readers), information becomes accessible to the largest number of users.
The accessibility of information is anchored in the coalition agreement which, in particular, also provides for the use of plain language. In this regard, the Guichet.lu information portal has expanded the scope of multilingual descriptions of the procedures. Since the end of 2019, several texts in German are written in "Leichte Sprache".
This is a very clear and simplified version of the language. It is intended for people who have difficulty reading and understanding. It consists of short sentences, uncomplicated words, explanations and pictures.
During 2021, we also aim to make more services available on Guichet.lu.
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
Meluxina: Luxembourg's new supercomputer
GovTech
E-embassies in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/govtech.html
GovTech
What exactly is GovTech? Strictly speaking, GovTech is the term used for technological innovation in the field of public administration. Its ultimate goal is to enable governments to provide better services to the public, citizens and businesses alike. Luxembourg’s own series of comprehensive and helpful tools have become a popular way to complete administrative procedures. At the same time, security and accessibility have become important benchmarks, thus continually driving innovation in this field. The recent launch of the GovTech Lab by the Ministry for Digitalisation and the Government IT Centre (CTIE) will now enable administrations to tap into the vast knowledge and innovative drive of private sector actors for long-term partnerships.
GovTech – innovation in public services
GovTech can have many faces, but one of the most visible in Luxembourg is thecountry’s online administrative portal,Guichet.lu, and the personalised spaces that citizens and companies use for administrative procedures, MyGuichet.lu. The portal offers a host of services, such as the possibility to submit forms electronically, access information about the status of your procedures and other useful tools, e.g. a simulator for rent subsidies.
These platforms are a true success story of Luxembourg's eGovernment strategy, counting over 300.000 visits each month onGuichet.lu and over 2 million completed procedures on MyGuichet.lu in 2020. These numbers increased substantially in 2020 due to the management of procedures for COVID-19, which ran exclusively via MyGuichet.lu.
However, this success relies on a number of factors, i.e. ease of access, security, accessibility and reliability. And each of these fields comes with its own set of challenges, the mastery of which determines whether or not the public will use its features. Moreover, as the technological environment progresses, so do the challenges to keep the portal up-to-date from a technical point of view – theGovernment IT Centre (CTIE)which manages the platforms is constantly seeking new solutions.
Take accessibility, for instance. The CTIE was tasked withfinding a secure way for users to enter their MyGuichet.lu account that would also be accessible for people with impairments. The available systems did however not seem to offer all of the features that the CTIE wanted. The only viable option was to seek out innovative ideas and open the quest for solutions up to everyone.
Thus, it was the perfect project to showcase Luxembourg’s most recent innovation in the field, the GovTech Lab.
GovTech Lab: Calling upon public ingenuity and innovation
TheGovTech Labfunctions like a long-term hackathon: the Ministry for Digitalisation and the CTIE willissue challenges gathered from state administrations, with the clear objective to improve services in the public sector. Every individual, group or company that thinks they have a solution to this challenge can then submit a project. How the challenge is solved is completely up to the participants, calling upon their ingenuity to innovate and imagine a solution that will prove to be beneficial to the public.
The projects will in turn be submitted to a jury, which then selects a winner. TheMinistry for Digitalisationand the CTIE will issue two challenges a year.
Contrary to a hackathon though, the collaboration does not stop there: theprocess was designed to potentially create lasting partnerships in the GovTech field. Indeed, the labs’ secondary goal is tonurture a GovTech community in Luxembourgthat is going to enrich the already large start-up and ICT communities that have set up shop in the Grand Duchy.
Rethinking existing procedures
What makes this initiative unique is that ituses open innovation, thusbringing the government’s objective to provide better digital solutions together with the skills and knowledge coming from outside the public sector. As such, it is an invitation to the rethinking of existing procedures and the integration of principles that are going to be instrumental in providing the best service to the public, such as digital by default, design thinking or service by design.
Even though this is a relatively recent field of innovation, the Luxembourg Ministry for Digitalisation and the Government IT Centre (CTIE) have quickly come to see it as an opportunity to promote eGovernment in Luxembourg and extend its services. Thus, the Grand Duchy has become one of only a handful of countries to launch a public call for solutions to challenges that public services face today.
Last update27.11.2024
For more information
Information and communication technologies
Technological environment
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/fnr-awards-2025-luxembourg-science.html
FNR Awards 2025
The FNR Awards showcase research and innovation work, and reward the winners and the institutions where they work. This annual celebration of science in Luxembourg was held on 23 October 2025 and prizes were awarded in four different categories.
FNR Awards 2024
FNR Awards 2025
Prof Dr. Andreas Fickers (C2DH), Associate Professor Sonja Kmec (University of Luxembourg) and Prof Dr. Dietmar Hüser (Saarbrücken University) received the Outstanding Scientific Achievement Award.
© FNR / Steve Ginepri
FNR Awards 2025
Dr. Jill Kries received the Outstanding PhD Thesis award.
© FNR / Steve Ginepri
FNR Awards 2025
Prof Christos Koulovatianos (University of Luxembourg) received the Outstanding Mentor award.
© FNR / Steve Ginepri
FNR Awards 2025
Dr. Florian Felten received the Outstanding PhD Thesis Award.
© FNR / Steve Ginepri
FNR Awards 2025
Juliette Pertuy, Bo Byloos, Maia Haas, Selima Malsagova & Maud Marocki (Luxembourg Space Agency), received the Outstanding Promotion of Science to the Public Award.
© FNR / Steve Ginepri
Annual awards - FNR Awards
Since 2009, the FNR has been awarding prizes in order to nurturecommunication between researchersand promotescientific activities aimed at the general public and young people.
In 2025, the prize categories were as follows:
FNR Awards 2025: Outstanding PhD Thesis - Dr. Florian Felten (University of Luxembourg) (Video/Audio YouTube)
FNR Awards 2025: Outstanding PhD Thesis - Dr. Jill Kries (KU Leuven) (Video/Audio YouTube)
FNR Awards 2025: Outstanding Scientific Achievement - Prof Dr. Andreas Fickers (C2DH), Associate Professor Sonja Kmec (University of Luxemburg) and Prof Dr. Dietmar Hüser (University of Saarbrücken)  (Video/Audio YouTube)
FNR Awards 2025: Outstanding Promotion of Science to the Public -  Juliette Pertuy, Bo Byloos, Maia Haas, Selima Malsagova and Maud Marocki (Luxembourg Space Agency) (Video/Audio YouTube)
FNR Awards 2025: Outstanding Mentor - Prof. Christos Koulovatianos (University of Luxemburg) (Video/Audio YouTube)
Three questions to Didier Goossens, Head of Communication at FNR
This year marks the 17th edition of the FNR Awards. What was the reason for creating this successful event in the first place? Why is such an event still so important today?
In 2009, the FNR launched the FNR Awards for one simple reason: The research of outstanding quality deserves to be publicly recognised. But not only in academic circles. The idea was also to show the general public that Luxembourg research, although young, can produce important discoveries, engage with society and inspire. At the time, only two categories existed: one for promoting science to the public, the other for outstanding scientific publications. Since then, the ceremony has been expanded to include an award for the best doctoral theses and, more recently, a category dedicated to exceptional scientific achievements (this category replaces the scientific publications category), as well as a category recognising "mentors". Today, more than ever, this spotlight is crucial: In a world saturated with information, giving public research a face and a voice helps to increase its visibility, but above all its relevance to society.
Over the years, many different researchers and research projects have won awards. Were there one or two projects that particularly stood out from the crowd?
It is difficult to choose, as each award-winning project tells a powerful story of determination, intuition or rigour. There has been research on the language of cancer cells, migration in Luxembourg or artificial intelligence applied to healthcare. What do they have in common? A desire to increase knowledge while addressing specific challenges. Rather than mentioning one or two projects, I would prefer to invite everyone to visit ourwebsite, where short videos present the winners. These are true portraits of explorers of knowledge, and sometimes they make you want to go back to study!
How have the FNR Awards evolved over the years? And what new features can we expect in the future?
The event has changed considerably. Initially less well known, it has established itself as a highlight of the calendar. The health crisis of 2020 pushed us to innovate: a 100% digital edition, similar to a television programme, followed by a hybrid format in 2021, which significantly increased our audience. Since then, we have sought to combine rigour and emotion, making science accessible without oversimplifying it. What are we planning for the future? Continue to surprise, inspire and build bridges between science and the public. The FNR Awards are not just a prize: they are an invitation to view research as a human and collective adventure.
Did you know?
TheLuxembourg National Research Fundis a leading stakeholder inresearch culturein Luxembourg, which is international, interdisciplinary and sustainable in its scope.
TheFNRinvests public funds and private donations in research projects in various branches of science and humanities, focusing on certain strategic areas, such as strengthening the link between science and society and raising awareness of research. It also advises the Luxembourg government on its research policy and strategy.
Open accessis vital for accelerating the process of innovation in universities while raising the profile of research results. For this reason, the Luxembourg National Library, the Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH), the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST) and theLuxembourg National Research Fund(FNR) have strengthened their commitment to open access by signing a publishing agreement with the open access publisherFrontiers.
Thenarrative CVfor researchers is another project managed by the FNR. These curricula raise the profile of the skills and abilities of researchers, rather than simply offering a chronological list of publications. They can be tailored to each proposal, by drawing attention to the achievements and experiences of which the researchers are most proud and can even include a personal statement.
Last update31.10.2025
For more information
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Mr Science or science for everyone
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/meluxina-supercomputer.html
Meluxina: Luxembourg's new supercomputer
The Grand Duchy has one of the most powerful supercomputers in Europe. The new hardware is capable of processing large volumes of data, carrying out thousands of billions of operations per second. To be exact, the Luxembourg supercomputer will have a calculating power of 10 petaflops - literally ten million billion operations per second, a number that looks like this:  10,000,000,000,000,000. MeluXina's performance should be able to reach the top 50 of the world rankingof the 500 most performant supercomputers.
Gaining momentum in research
Supercomputers can process large volumes of data and perform complex calculations at high speed in areas such as modelling and simulation, big data analysis and artificial intelligence. But that's not all. They can also give new opportunities to companies to innovate and remain competitive in an ever-more digital world. Above all, MeluXina will be the main ally of very time and calculation consuming fields, such asresearch and economics. It's a tool with manifold uses: more accurate design of complex parts, reduced time-to-market for products and reduced material costs.
In the scientific community, it will be used forpersonalised medicineand eHealth projects, but also to meet the needs of companies, especially SMEs and start-ups in order to strengthen national and European innovation.
MeluXina is also a great advantage for the financial marketplace, since it will accompany the economy's digital transition. The mastodon computer will contribute to the implementation of a sustainable and reliabledigital economyby making high-performance computing accessible to businesses of all sizes.
Did you know?
A consortium of European partners led by theUniversity of Luxembourghas been selected by theEuroHPC Joint Undertakingto design and implement the firstEuropean High Performance Computing Master's programmefrom autumn 2022.
The central goal of the initiative is to strengthen mobility between European universities, research centres, and industry. The new HPC Master's programme reaches out to scientific and industrial target groups and serves key actors in the private and public sector.
MeluXina is hosted in Bissen
Luxembourg's future supercomputer will be part of a large family of supercomputers linked throughout Europe in theEuropean network known as EuroHPC- an initiative co-financed by the European Commission and 32 countries, and its headquarters are based in the Grand Duchy. The aim is to develop an ecosystem and infrastructure of supercomputers on the continent.
Operational by the end of 2022, the National Competence Centre for High-Performance Computing will be aone-stop shopfor companies and will offer personalised professional support and technical expertise to set up HPC projects.
The new technological gem, costing30.4 million euros, will be hosted, operated and marketed at theLuxConnect data centre in Bissen, and powered exclusively by green energy produced in part by Kiowatt, a cogeneration plant fuelled by scrap wood.
Last update17.10.2024
For more information
E-embassies in Luxembourg
Blockchain
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/blockchain.html
Blockchain
Decentralisation, transparency and immutability are the keywords of blockchain. The pillars in Luxembourg have been built to determine the right development strategy of these supply chains. Encouraging widespread adoption for the overall good of the country, is under way.
The technology: what is a blockchain?
A blockchain is adigital recording of transactions. Its name is derived from its structure, in which the individual records, called blocks, are linked together in a single list, called a string. At present,blockchains are mainly usedin thefinancial sector, but digital identification, proof of land ownership, supply chain management and even voting are only a fraction of the potential applications that would be ofinterest to the public sectoras well.
Because it is decentralised, it also makes it possibleto solve problems connected with single points of failurein the event of incidents or attacks, giving it the potential to help public stakeholdersreduce fraud and errorandimprove the transparencyof both data and transactions.
Smart caps: a specific example
Guala Closures Group, which was founded in Italy in 1954, is nowthe world leaderof the production ofsafety capsfor spirits and one of the top manufacturers ofaluminium capsfor liquor, wine and beverages, producing 20 billion caps each year. In 2017, the group inaugurated itsfifth research centre in the world, but its first one in Luxembourg. 'Smart caps' are partially developed here.
Guala Closure's new technology, NěSTGATE™, which was launched in 2019, revolutionised conventional bottle packagingby integrating a connectivity feature in bottle caps. Using NFC (Near Field Communication) technology or a QR code, the company can now offer a 360° service featuring new technological solutions likea platform and an infrastructure to manage large data acquisitions, the blockchain, etc.
The benefits of NěSTGATE™ smart caps are evident at three levels.
Thepartnershipbetween Guala Closures andCompellio, a Luxembourg software company, means that customers of smart closure products can, for example,createtheir own virtual cellars and receive information on wines and other products. With the blockchain system, consumers can alsoverifythe product's authenticity, as it ensures the bottle's uniqueidentification.
The technology is subject to GDPR regulationsand must be consciously triggered by the customer by reading the NFC device or the cap's QR code.
Blockchain of the public sector: Luxembourg paves the way
In 2019, theMinistry of Digitalisation, in collaboration with the 'Syndicat intercommunal de gestion information' (SIGI) and theGovernment IT Centre(CTIE) announced the creation of thepublic sector's first blockchain. It's a first in Luxembourg, and probably in the world. This technology offers all players in the public sectorthe opportunity to improve the transparency, reliability and securityof public sector digital information systems and processes.
Many associations and initiatives, partially backed by the government supportresearch,educationanddevelopmentof blockchain technology in Luxembourg. In 2019,five of the main stakeholders, INFRACHAIN,LëtzBlock, LHoFT (Luxembourg House of Financial Technology), LIST (Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology) and the SnT (Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust) of the University of Luxembourg, launcheda collaboration to strengthen Luxembourg as an ultimate European blockchain hub.
In February of the same year, the Chamber of Deputies adopteda bill of lawaimed at providinglegal certainty for securities transfers using blockchain technology. Another bill of law on the direct issuing of blockchain securities is under way. This regulatory positioning not only shows thatthe Luxembourgish government wishes to promote as many blockchain-friendly projects as possiblein the financial and other sectors, but also its willingness to innovate.
Did you know?
Student loans are digitized by Blockchain in Luxembourg! Since 1 August 2021, applicants for financial aid for higher education from the state can apply for their loan from their bank electronically in a fully secure and traceable way. Spuerkeess is the "pilot bank" for this innovative project. More informationhere!
Last update25.11.2024
For more information
Innovation
Competitiveness
Key sectors
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/e-embassies-in-luxembourg.html
E-embassies in Luxembourg
Digital societies, which are dependent on information and communication technologies, must face up to a number of major challenges. One challenge is the issue of working out how to protect all the data that might become vulnerable in the event of a cyberattack. In this context, the concept ofe-embassiesis aninnovation in diplomatic relations that ensures the hosting of sensitive data in a friendly country combined with guarantees of immunity. In 2015,Estonia's e-embassy was a world first in Luxembourg. Six years later, the e-embassy ofMonacohas found its way to the Grand Duchy – it was officially launched in July 2021.
E-embassies – sensitive data kept safe from cyberattacks
The purpose of this new diplomatic approach is tosave a country's sensitive data at a data centre in another, friendly, country. This means that the terms 'e-embassy' and 'data embassy', which both refer to this innovative concept in diplomatic relations, are synonyms.
Data is hosted withguarantees of immunity and privileges similar to those of a traditional embassybecause the founding agreements between countries take account of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. It is nevertheless a totally new concept in international law: as is the case for actual embassies, the data centres constitute sovereign territory of the country that owns the data.
The data saved in these virtual embassies are copies of a country's most sensitive and confidential data, or evendigital twinsof a country's 'cloud'. Thus in a world in which cyberattacks are on the increase, e-embassies will help protect vital data and services that are essential to the smooth running of a country, thereby reducing the potential impact of a cyberattack.
Estonia and Monaco – digital diplomacy in the Grand Duchy
Estonia's 'data embassy'in the Grand Duchy has been aworld first. The launch of the e-embassy project dates back to 2015; the agreement between the two countries was signed in 2017. Since 2018, an extension of the Estonian Government's 'cloud' has been hosted atLuxConnect's certified Tier IV data centre.
Estonia, hailed by theWorld Bankas the world's most advanced digital society, had its first experience in cyberconflict in 2007, when a number of attacks succeeded in simultaneously downing 58 Estonian websites, including those of the Government, most newspapers, and several banks. Although no information was lost during the attack, it gave considerable impetus to the idea of ensuring the functioning of services and the continuity of data via 'data embassies' located outside the country.
A few months later, in December 2018, the Grand Duchy andMonacosigned a partnership on digital innovation that included a section on saving sensitive data in a data centre with guarantees of immunity in line with the model of Estonia's e-embassy. It has become strategically important for the Principality of Monaco to protect data from the risks of cyberattack and natural disaster – guarantees that are impossible to set up in a State covering an area of no more than 2km2.
Following the signing of abilateral agreement on 15th July 2021, theMonaco e-embassyon Luxembourg soil was officially born. Today, two and a half years after initiating the process, Monaco and Luxembourg have finalised the storage of the Principality's sensitive data. Following this agreement between the two countries, Luxembourg now hosts a digital twin of the Monegasque sovereign cloud in Bissen, thereby applying the recommended security standard of 120km between two storage locations.
The Grand Duchy - a pole of excellence in the field of digital technologies and data security
The Grand Duchy has two great advantages for implementing these innovative projects.
Firstly, atelecom network hyperconnectedto primary Internet access centres in other countries. TheDigital Economy and Society Index (DESI) for 2020confirms the excellence of the Grand Duchy's technological environment: the Grand Duchy is ranked 3rd in Europe in terms of connectivity. In this context, the launch of thenational 5G strategyin 2018 is a demonstration of the firm intention to consolidate the country's role in this field.
The Grand Duchy also has a great deal of experience incybersecurity. 2016 saw the inauguration ofLuxConnect's DC1.3 data centre, with its 5,500m2 of available IT space; it is certified to the Uptime Institute's Tier 11 andTier IV. Whereas a data centre normally has a single Tier level, a Tier IV data centre has redundant components and distribution circuits so there is no IT impact in the event of a breakdown (it is said to be 'fault tolerant'). These days, the Grand Duchy is a leader in terms of Tier IV certified data centres.
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
Technological environment
International openness
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/pcds.html
The circular economy – the circulation of information is also vital
For centuries, our economies have been based on the linear use of resources - buy, use, throw away. The circular economy tries to eliminate the very concept of waste by reusing, repairing or refurbishing products along the entire value chain. However, to succeed, it requires the circulation of resources as well as information.
Meeting the demand for standardised data on circularity
In order to reach circularity targets, products must not only be circular by design, but all actors involved would need in-depth information on the composition of the products throughout all phases, from raw materials to finished products and from use to recycling.
In 2019, Luxembourg's Ministry of the Economy launchedthe Product Circularity Data Sheet (Fiche de données sur la circularité des produits- PCDS). Its objective is to facilitate the sharing of information on circularity.The information made available in the PCDS is clear, verifiable and standardised. The data sheets contain 130 declarations and cover the entire lifecycle of a product in a simple manner.
The initiative is a leading example of Luxembourg’sData-driven Innovation Strategy, which aims to promote the circular economy through the use of big data solutions. Companies from 12 European countries took part in the initiative.
The Product Circularity Data Sheet (PCDS) by Terra Matters (Video/Audio YouTube)
Geobloc - presentation of a case built on solid foundations
Geoblocis a company that specialises in the production of clay bricks in Luxembourg. Itsuccessfully completed its first Product Circularity Data Sheet Luxembourgin cooperation withTerra Matters, the reference platform for the creation of PCDSs. This initiative also enabled the company to:
The PCDS design process has also led Geobloc toreview its resource management practices and develop guidelines to make sure its products remain recyclable at the end of their life. This experience has demonstrated that the PCDS can serve as a strategic tool for any company wishing to strengthen their circular strategy.
A model based on a three-fold system
At the time, more than 50 companies from 12 countries and industry leaders joined the project to further enrich the PCDS in sectors such as construction and consumer goods. The PCDS was presented to major platforms and leaders in the field of international circular economy for further input and comments. The objective was to raise awareness of the project and to promote its acceptance among existing initiatives and stakeholders.
It is based on three elements:
Challenges and objectives
Several barriers were identified in ongoing projects and led to careful consideration on how to solve them. The main obstacle encountered was thelimited availability of basic data on the circular economy:
In order to overcome these issues, the PCDS project has evolved towards a normative framework and a structured governance model.
ISO 59040
The International Organization for Standardization(ISO)published theISO 59040standard, Product Circularity Data Sheet (PCDS),to promote the circular economy. This standard, developed with the support of theLuxembourg Ministry of the Economy, provides a standardised framework for evaluating and communicating the circularity of products.Luxembourg played a key role in its development and deployment,underlining its leadership in the circular economy.
ISO 59040 helps companies comply with ever-increasing regulations, such as the European Sustainable Product Regulation (ESPR) and the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD). It provides a structured format for data on product circularity, promoting transparency and data-driven decision-making.
Luxembourg is recognised as an innovation hub in the circular economy, actively promoting policy initiatives and advanced research projects. The adoption of ISO 59040 has further strengthened this roleby helping industries to manage resources sustainably in various sectors such as construction, manufacturing, electronics and textiles.
A little history...
The Ministry of the Economy launched the PCDS initiative in 2018in order to create an industry standard for product circularity data. A standardised data model was developed in 2019, and several companies joined and tested the project in 2020. To guarantee the reliability of the data provided by the PCDS,a third-party verification process was put in place. Work on developing the IT ecosystem continued, and thePCDS was submitted to the International Organisation for Standardisation(ISO) in partnership withILNAS- Institut luxembourgeois de la normalisation, de l'accréditation, de la sécurité et qualité des produits et services. The PCDS has been adopted and implemented since 2022-2023.
In 2022, the Ministry of the Economy and theChamber of Commercecreated theTerraMatters platform to foster the widespread adoption and use of PCDS.
TerraMatters: a driving force behind the democratisation of the PCDS
The Luxembourg Ministry of the Economy has formed a partnership with the Luxembourg Chamber of Commerce to create the GIE TerraMatters. TerraMatters supports companies in implementing the PCDS as a standardised, interoperable tool aimed at facilitating the collection and exchange of information on product circularity. Owing to GIE TerraMatters, the use of PCDS is encouraged on a large scale, notably in strategic sectors, such as construction and consumer goods.
Last update31.03.2025
For more information
Luxembourg's Circular Economy
Green Finance
Pied de page
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/technological-environment.html
Technological environment
Luxembourg provides an ideal technological environment for innovation leaders and growing businesses. Built on security and reliability as its pillars and renowned for its superb connectivity, the Grand-Duchy displays a state-of-the-art and ever-evolving digital infrastructure. Discover different parts of the nation's digital backbone and how they help national and international partners thrive.
A model pupil in the EU's digital frontier and ICT infrastructure
Ranked among the EU's top performers in digital infrastructure according to theReport on the state of the Digital Decade,Luxembourg stands as a valuable contributor to the EU's Digital Decade targets. Through constant expansion and upgrades of its broadband infrastructure, coupled with a powerful high-performance computing (HPC) ecosystem and excellent 5G coverage, the Grand Duchy shows its dedication to strive for innovation.
In fact, the proper functioning of businesses nowadays heavily relies on information and communication technologies (ICT). As a result, well-developed networking can have a huge impact on success and growth. Backed by cutting-edge digital infrastructure,Luxembourg'sICT sectorunites Luxembourg's key ICT players to cultivate cross-sectoral opportunities, facilitate business growth, and foster collaboration between companies and research institutions.
Powerful, together: Luxembourg's HPCs
Meet Luxembourg's most capable supercomputer:MeluXina. At its launch in 2021 under theEuropean High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (EuroHPC JU),where it earned a place among the top 50 supercomputers worldwide, it was named after Melusina, the mythic mermaid from one of the country's founding legends. A suitable name, considering MeluXina is water-cooled and serves as a cornerstone in the national digital ecosystem.
Its computing power allows both public and private companies, along with research organisations, to access a wide range of services across various domainssuch as climatology, engineering, aeronautics, automobile design, energy production, medicine or financial analysis. Consequently, Luxembourg introduced amaster programme in high performance computingin 2023 to train the future generations of national and European HPC specialists.
MeluXina - Luxembourg's Supercomputer (Video/Audio YouTube)
Europe's densest network of next-generation data centres
Next to raw computational power,security and trust are core qualities of Luxembourg's ICT development strategy. Hence, why three of its 16 modern data centres are Tier IV certified, indicating their adherence to the highest industry standards for reliability and efficiency.This national network features the highest density of Tier IV data centres in Europe. With flexible data centre providers like,LuxConnect,ebrcorDATA4, the Grand Duchy offers a wide range of services for both ICT start-ups and multinational companies.
Connectivity: A strong link in the chain
Connectivity is a vital component for establishing a reliable ICT environment. Situated in the heart of Europe,Luxembourg is intricately connected to an international fibre network, making it an ultra-low latency hub. With a well-definedultra-high-speed broadband strategy, its national very high-capacity network (VHCN) and 5G coverage are constantly increasing,continually outperforming the European averages.
Benefiting from widespread fibre optic infrastructure, which extends to three-quarters of households,Luxembourg ranks within the top 30% in Europe for broadband speed. Next to its active fibre network, the Grand Duchy is home to several dark fibre grids. These dormant networks serve as critical infrastructure for upgrading telecommunications and internet connectivity within the country and meeting the increasing demand for high-speed data transmission services.
Technology driving growth: national collaborators
Here are three of the many players in this intertwined digital environment:
Research Luxembourg counts many actors in the public research domain. For example, the Luxembourg Institute of Health (LIH), the Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology (LIST) and the University of Luxembourg (Uni.lu) to name a few.
In the field of research, the national digital infrastructure facilitates data exchange whilst keeping a high level of security and privacy for sensitive research information. Furthermore, access to supercomputers such as MeluXina, AION (Uni.lu) or the LIST's HPC supports research projects across a variety of fields and allows them to tackle complex computation problems.
SES is one of the world's leading satellite operators, headquartered in the Grand Duchy. Incollaboration with national institutions like the LIST, they utilise and build upon Luxembourg's digital infrastructure to drive innovation and shape the future of the country.
As a dedicated hub for fintech collaboration, the LHoFT leverages Luxembourg's connectivity and ICT to connect start-ups, financial institutions, and regulatory bodies. It serves as a networking steppingstone for smaller companies and aims to support their growth in the fintech ecosystem.
Last update20.05.2025
For more information
National ICT
MeluXina - Luxembourg's HPC
Research and innovation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation/intellectual-property.html
Intellectual property
Approachable and open-minded stakeholders, an extensive research and development environment and a favourable linguistic situation: Luxembourg offers an ideal environment for resorting to intellectual property rights, whether in the context of patents, trademarks, designs or models, or even copyrights or neighboring rights.
An ideal environment for your intellectual property rights
National and international laws and conventions recognize the fruit borne by Intellectual efforts as intellectual property rights for the protection of certain non-material assets.
Luxembourg'sremarkable performances in the area of intellectualpropertyare regularly highlighted, both at community and international level, even though the country has seen a sharp  rise in the number of jobs in high density economic sectors of intellectual property of intellectual property rights (IPRs). These days, an ever-growing part of the market value of businesses is generated by IPRs, which have become one  of the main facilitators of economic development.
In Luxembourg, intellectual property and innovation go hand in hand
Aside from its attractive R&D policy, Luxembourg can boast other indisputable advantages:
Office for Intellectual Property
19-21, boulevard RoyalL-2914 Luxembourg
Tel.: (+352) 247-84113E-Mail:dpi@eco.etat.lu
Institute for intellectual property Luxembourg
134, route d'ArlonL-8008 Strassen
Tel.: +352 274-80210
E-Mail:info@ipil.lu
Last update04.04.2025
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Information and communication technologies
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/social-solidarity-economy-societal-impact-companies.html
The social and solidarity economy and societal impact companies
Social utility, cooperation and local presence are values that are increasingly visible in our society and in the structures that make up the country's economy. Since 2016, Luxembourg has had a specific legal status for companies in the social and solidarity economy: societal impact companies. The dynamism of the sector is reflected in a new dedicated portal for the social and solidarity economy and the creation of the "Impact Luxembourg" label.
The social and solidarity economy
The social and solidarity economy is based on the idea of balancing economic activity and social equity to respond to the needs and challenges of today's society. It is an umbrella term that covers a series of entities rooted in the same values: social utility, cooperation and local presence adapted to the needs of the community and the population.
Did you know?
There is anEncyclopedia of the Social and Solidarity Economy, coordinated by the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on Social and Solidarity Economy (UNTFSSE). With a total of 57 entries and a list of 70 contributors from all over the world, the book – which was funded by Luxembourg – is available in open access. It is a tool that can provide stakeholders with additional knowledge and promote this social approach to a wider public.
The new social and solidarity-based approach is playing an increasing role in Luxembourg's economic fabric. The rapidly growing sector comprises players in fields as wide-ranging as social action, health, bioeconomics, the environment, culture, education and sport, as well as trade unions and political parties. In total, the sector represents 2.2% of national gross value added and 4% of the country's employment. On average,production associated with the social and solidarity economy is growing 4% more quickly than overall national production. It is also a sector that involves a considerable number of volunteers: in 2020, a total of 15 million hours were worked by more than67,000 volunteers, representing 11% of the population.
Luxembourg, committed to the social and solidarity economy for more than 20 years
The social and solidarity economy may seem like a new concept in the economic landscape, but it goes back a long way in Luxembourg society. Thefirst "Solidarity Economy Unit"was set up in the Ministry of Labour and Employment in1999. The unit subsequently became a ministerial department, a first national action plan was adopted in 2011 and the word "social" was added. After the signing of theLuxembourg Declarationfor the Social and Solidarity Economy in2015, the Act for theestablishment of societal impact companies(sociétés d'impact sociétal- SIS, in French) was introduced in2016, together with measures to promote this status: an initial incubator to support social entrepreneurs, which became theMaison de l'économie sociale et de l'innovation sociale(MESIS) in 2018 and was renamed theSocial Business Incubatorin2022.
Societal impact companies
To encourage the creation of companies rooted in the social and solidarity economy, aspecific legal statuswas launched in 2016:societal impact companies (SIS). Since the status was created, the number of companies has grown considerably: of the 51 entities linked with the social and solidarity economy set up between 2015 and 2020, a total of 25 had SIS status.
Societal impact company status is aimed at bothexisting companies or organisationsandproject leaderslooking to launch a business with a social or societal objective. Only those companies that comply with the principles of the social and solidarity economy are grantedaccreditation. Therequirements in terms of transparency and governanceare strict.
The "Impact Luxembourg – Societal Impact Company" label was launched in October 2022 to help position these companies in Luxembourg's economic network and to distinguish their services from those provided by companies that are not subject to the same legal and tax obligations. TheLuxembourg Union for the Social and Solidarity economy (ULESS)is the partner tasked with managing and awarding the label.
Impact Luxembourg - Société d'impact sociétal (Video/Audio YouTube)
Social Business Incubator
A new incubator for societal impact companies, theSocial Business Incubator, was established in September 2022. It reflects Luxembourg's ambition todevelop the social and solidarity economyas part of itspolicy of economic diversification. The incubator offers bespoke advice and guidance to meet the needs of project leaders.
These companies work in a wide variety of fields, including education, coaching, housing, magazines, integration and food. Here is a small themed selection to guide you towards societal impact companies that have been awarded the label:
Impact Luxembourg - Impact story - On.perfekt (Video/Audio YouTube)
Impact Luxembourg - Impact story - Kaf Lokal (Video/Audio YouTube)
Impact Luxembourg - Impact story - ProActif (Video/Audio YouTube)
Are you looking for a socially responsible company for your purchases or services? We would encourage you to browse through the directory on thededicated social and solidarity economy portaland to visit theImpact Luxembourg website.
Last update18.12.2024
For more information
Ethical shopping in Luxembourg
Sustainable urban planning in Luxembourg
Top 5: environmentally friendly innovative projects
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/creation-business-luxembourg.html
Starting up a business in Luxembourg
The Grand Duchy offers many advantages for anyone starting up their own business: a diversified economy, strong foreign trade, an entrepreneurial culture that is developing constantly, a Third Industrial Revolution strategy, and a geographical position at the heart of Europe. Do you want to take advantage of this productive environment and achieve your dream? Let us tell you the success story of Anne Bauler, master seamstress!
Shelteredunder the roofs of Bonnevoiein her own house is thesewing workshoprun byAnne Bauler. Sewing has always beenher favourite pastime: her grandmother had a fabric shop in Diekirch and her mother loved dressmaking, so it is no surprise that Anne Bauler has been sewing accessories such as bags and scarves since she was very young.
One thing led to anotherand she gained more sewing skills by working under the supervision of seamstressesalready established in the Grand Duchy. After studying and working in the fields of law of chemistry, Anne Bauler discovered that it is possible totake the master craftsman examination without having to take the apprenticeship exam.She already had a baccalaureate qualification, but needed tocatch up in the craftto be able to make her way towards independence. She attended theory classes at the Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts for more than three years and carried out a number of placements in order to clock up the necessary number of hours of practical work in the profession. She eventuallyobtained the master craftsman's certificate in 2016!
During 2015, during Luxembourg's Presidency of the Council of the EU, Anne Bauler went to Brussels, working as a legal expert. She took advantage of the experience of being in a different country before finally embarking three years later on the procedure to become self-employed. She started at theChamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts. Itsbusiness creation offerhelps beginners to follow the necessary procedures and gather the documents needed for the new business' file.A personal development coachhelped Anne Bauler structure her ideas and lay down the guidelines for her project. Her business permit was issued three months later.
When I do something, I put all I've got into it. The safety net of part-time work or unpaid leave only delays the decision to actually become your own boss.
For two months she worked part-time as a civil servant while she went through the procedure for becoming self-employed. In the end she left her job as a civil servant andstarted her own business in 2018 with a small number of creations. Butcustomers were not forthcoming. She advertised on social media and created a website, but it was above allher friends and familywho helped hand out business cards and talked about her to other people. Meanwhile, Anne Bauler continued with her passion and launched her firstsewing classes. They were a great success right from the start: individualism, an ecological mindset and the spirit of DIY are more topical than ever.
Today, she still runs sewing classes in her workshop, and occasionally at various cultural centres.She is a member of the team of examiners for the master craftsman's qualification, and teaches technical theory at the Chamber of Skilled Trades and Crafts. As a dressmaker, Anne Bauler producesgarments for special occasions,made-to-measure clothes,designs and costumes for theatre productions,outfits for 'cosplayers'- who have even won prizes thanks to her creations - andauthentic costumes for 18th-century historical re-enactments. Alongside these very varied activities,she advises on colours and styles in the capacity of a "colour coach".
What she likes most about her work is being able towork creativelyand, at the end of it,to hold in her hand something she has made herself.The classes provide an opportunity to talk to others and communicate her passion to them. They also give rise tonew ideas, while studying colours is a passion she would like to develop further. Anne Bauler works withecological and fairtrade materials. As a new entrepreneur, she has learned that she can not and should not do everything herself - help is always at hand.
Life is too short to wonder what it would have been like if I would have done things differently. Regretting later on something you did not do is worse than having a go and making a mess of it. With a bit of luck and a lot of hard work, you can turn your hobby into your job.
Last update04.09.2024
For more information
Start your own business in Luxembourg - achieve your professional goals!
Guichet.lu: the virtual gateway to public administration.
Your business in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/bioincubateur-house-of-biohealth.html
The bioincubator of the House of Biohealth
The next extension of the House of Biohealth will be completely devoted to hosting start-ups and spin-offs from the healthcare technology sector. By spring 2021, this 'bioincubator' will make available fully equipped laboratories to start-ups, as well as offer professional coaching in the field of business development, focusing on sector-specific activities.
The new jewel of the House of Biohealth
The third and final extension of theHouse of Biohealthwill provide close to350m2offully equipped laboratoryspace which will be made available to a maximum often start-ups and spin-offsduring theirinitial three years of activity. However, it is not just space that has been made available,entrepreneurial supportis also provided, hence the name "bioincubator". In fact, budding businesses in the health technology sector will be able to benefit from professional support in terms of specialised business development.
Inaugurated in 2015, the House of Biohealth currently hosts nine companies and two public research laboratories: theLuxembourg Institute of Health(LIH) and theLuxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine(LSCB).With the extension, the institution will be able to host close to 600 researchers in a space which comprises 9,500m2 of laboratories and 5,500 m2 of offices.
The House of Biohealth, more than a building
The House of Biohealth is ahosting facilityfor companies in thebiotechnology, ICT and ecotechnology sector- the outcome of a partnership between the Ministry of Economy, private investors and the Syndicat intercommunal pour la création, l'aménagement, la promotion et l'exploitation d'une zone d'activités économiques à caractère régional à Ehlerange (ZARE)
The clustering of companies provides significantsynergies, often creating new opportunities owing to the amalgamation ofpublic researchactivities withcommercial activitieson a common site.
Fast Track Diagnostics, the fight against Coronavirus spearheaded in Esch-sur-Alzette
The development of the companyFast Track Diagnosticsdemonstrates the progress in the field of healthcare technologies that are 'made in Luxembourg' and the role of infrastructures made available at the House of Biohealth.
Created in 2006in Esch-sur-Alzette, it has subsequently become one of the world's leading suppliers of diagnostic kits for the detection of infectious diseases. In 2016, it obtained thefirst prize at the Export Awards 2015-2016. The purpose of the awards is to reward small and medium-sized enterprises that have distinguished themselves owing to the expansion of their activities on the global stage. In2017, the company waspurchased by Siemens Healthineers. It currently employs 127 people.
Fast Track Diagnostics developed themolecular diagnostic kits (PCR) used as part of the Large Scale Testing in Luxembourg. Approximately 6.5 million tests have been produced since March 2020; they are currently used in 120 countries.
Healthcare technologies, a pillar in the diversification of the economy
This initiative is part of Luxembourg's strategy to diversify its economy. For several years, the country has demonstrated its commitmentto become a leading destination for capital and talent in the health technology sector. In fact, over the past ten years, significant sums of investment have been made to establish the necessary framework for the development of new companies in this sector, as well as to attract companies from other continents.
In this regard, the bioincubator intends tofurther develop the economic impact of investmentdevoted to the expansion of biomedical public research in Luxembourg. It also aims tofoster the transitionfrom an ecosystem based on public researchtowards an innovative ecosystem spearheaded by companies.
Last update28.08.2025
For more information
Health technologies: a thriving and innovative sector
Research and innovation in Luxembourg
Intellectual property
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/annen-plus.html
Annen Plus - modern architecture has a name
The image of craftsmanship is often associated with tradition, with craftsmen working in their workshop, but seldom with innovation. However, the reality is quite different. With the advent of digitalisation, many companies are showing an appetite for new technologies.
One of them is the companyAnnen Plus in Manternach.It was awarded - for its craftsmanship combined with digitalisation - the 2017 Craft's Innovation Award, The Hands of Innovation, in the 'Production Process and System' category. The company particularly stood out for itsinnovative wood construction systemthat does not require screws or nails.
Modern, innovative and aesthetic. That's how we could define Annen Plus' architectural buildings in three words. With a staff of about a hundred people, it specializes in the construction of modular wooden structures that are used for all types of large buildings, such as storage halls, production halls, sports/cultural centres and even office buildings.
Each piece has its importance
The most surprising in this new way of thinking thearchitectural approach, is theinnovating sensein a creation that could be described as evolutionary, if not revolutionary. House Annen's concept is based onparametric constructioni.e. a way to achieve extraordinarily complex constructions in a flexible way without making mistakes.
In other words, it means that in an architectural plan, all the elements used will be converted into electronic data. Then, a numerical process deals with the manufacturing of various elements, all of which is computer-assisted. The parts resulting from the production chain can be perfectly assembled. They are then coded to make the final construction easier.
With the company Annen, constructions makeeach room uniquebut also specifically adapted to the entire project.
Annen Plus, grand gagnant du Prix de l'innovation en 2017 (Video/Audio YouTube)
Grâce à son système de construction innovant, Annen Plus a remporté la 5e édition du Prix de l'innovation en 2017
Strength through unity
The 2017 Craft's Innovation Award was also awarded to the company Annen Plus as it managed to combine artisanknow-how and digitalisation. In fact, it is especially the use of digitalisation that made this automation of construction processes possible today.
Digitalisation manages the numerical control of the machine tools, capable of producing the thousands of construction parts, whether joints or other assemblies of an architectural project.  This manufacturing system combined with parametric programming means that almost every shape is within reach.
Modern architecture by Annen is not only aesthetic, but modular. It especially makes it possible toreduce this innovative company's ecological footprint.Not only are the structures easy to build, erect and transport, but the Annen system supportssustainable development, as the parts can be reused on various constructions. What's more, the buildings areenergy efficient, thought out to have the lowest impact on the environment, all in the spirit ofcircular economy.
3 questions to Alois Annen, Director of Annen Plus S.A.
1. In 2017, the company Annen Plus won the 2017 Craft's Innovation Award. What does this Award mean to you? Has it had an impact on your work?
We are very proud of this award. It reflects our commitment, the know-how of our team and our efforts to bring new ideas and techniques to life, in line with to economic and technical change.
The award has brought enduring attention to the company. As a result, we are receiving an increasing number of inquiries, which is a challenge for many. These challenges in turn offer opportunities through which we can learn and grow.
A very important marketing tool of the company is word of mouth. Our services and product range make us stand out from the crowd. As a result, we have a steadily growing number of customer enquiries.
2. The Innovation Award was attributed to your company among others for its innovation. How would you describe the innovative nature of your architectural creations?
Innovation is necessary and very exciting. For us, innovation is part of our daily business (sometimes on a large scale and sometimes on a small scale). With the help of the latest technologies and new ways of working, we are able to implement even complex and elaborate types of architecture. Every building is a sign of its time. Nothing is as constant as change and this is where we come in, taking into account the environment, time management and quality.
3. Digitalisation can be a great catalyst for growth. How does digitalisation impact your way of working on a daily basis?
We seize opportunities, large and small, and are happy to invest in changes that help us advance.
We stand for traditional craftsmanship as well as the use of the latest digital techniques. Digital methods are an indispensable tool.In order to successfully realise special wishes of our clients, we use the complete range of design tools.
In all areas, we put a lot of energy into converting analogue working methods into digital ways of working. This ensures efficiency gains and jobs for us in the medium term.
Last update07.02.2025
For more information
Genaveh: Luxembourgish chocolate jewellery boxes
Art and craft trades
Craftsmanship, the driving force of the Luxembourg economy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/genaveh-luxembourgish-chocolate-jewellery-boxes.html
Genaveh: Luxembourgish chocolate jewellery boxes
Female craftsmanship, the democratisation of high-end chocolate coated with an image of luxury and the internationalisation of made in Luxembourg seem to beGenavehchocolatefactory's recipe for success. Hand in hand with her young team of chocolate makers,Alexandra Kahnhas succeeded in preserving the house's essence while endowing it with a modern image that has consolidated beyond Luxembourg's borders.
We met with the young entrepreneur to hear about her passion for chocolate, the importance of craftsmanship and how she keeps the handmade side of a product she sells internationally.
After studying management and entrepreneurship, you worked for four years in Hong Kong, first in banking and then in luxury marketing consultancy. With your passion for pastry-making, you decided to retrain a few years ago by doing several internships with pastry-making and chocolate craftsmen. You have been the manager of Genaveh since 2017. Is there a common thread between your experiences in Asia and the current evolution of the chocolate industry?
Yes, everything is connected to something! I started cooking and pastry-making in Asia to try to find the flavours we were missing there. That's how I really got interested in gastronomy and cooking and really started enjoying these things.
In the end I realise that everything has a meaning, even if it is not obvious at the beginning, nor particularly wanted. Finance, marketing, luxury... all of my experience now comes in handy in the daily management and development of the chocolate factory.
Genaveh products can be found on the shelves of many points of sale in Luxembourg. They can also be found in France and a distribution partnership has been entered into with Israel, Saudi Arabia and Canada. How to remain both hand-made in Luxembourg and international at the same time?
The idea is to grow, of course, but to keep the focus on craftsmanship, handmade products and quality. It is not about abandoning craftsmanship in favour of large partnerships. These new partnerships have been thought through at length and correspond to certain criteria that allow us to remain craftsmen.
To preserve the artisan side of our products in spite of the sales increase, it was also necessary to increase the team by +50% during the year and by +150% during the high season.
We are made in Luxembourg because we want everything to be done on site in our workshop in Steinfort! We are made in Luxembourg by selecting as many local products as possible, which come straight from Luxembourg!  Added to this is the know-how of our team, which we wish to export internationally and make Luxembourg chocolates known throughout the world.
Does the opening of a new chocolate production workshop in October 2020 support Genaveh's internationalisation strategy?
Genaveh's development in the last three years was a true test for us on our former premises: an increasingly obvious lack of space which forced us to play Tetris in the high season. With this new workshop with better thought-out spaces, we can now gain in efficiency, to respond to growing demand and to contemplate growth both nationally and internationally.
It was also our wish to give our craftsmen the best working conditions.
Innovation has been one of the key words of Genaveh's new page since your take-over in 2017. What was the greatest innovation?
In terms of chocolate-related work, many new elements punctuated my arrival. But I would say that the Fingers were the greatest innovation! Fine sesame,feuilletineor pistachio pralines with a hint of salt, which I created following the purchase for a client of moulds of this shape.
We also redesigned our range of spreads, now known asNoisettes à Tartiner(Hazelnut Spread), to make them healthier (with coconut oil), tastier and less sweet. We've also just finished creating a vegan version of it.
In terms of business, we have tripled the size of the team, which is also more structured and specialised, and developed processes to manage demand as well as possible.
As for the chocolate-related trade... First of all, what is artisan chocolate?
It all starts with a very careful selection of quality raw material. Along with our know-how, this is what is behind the full flavour of our products. From the creation of recipes, to the decoration of the chocolates, everything is handmade by our craftsmen.
By combining Belgian and French techniques, we can say that we have created a Genaveh chocolate identity. Generous and gourmet chocolates, just like Luxembourg, that make us very proud.
What is the creative process behind new delights? What inspires you and your team?
Creation springs either from a pure desire or from the need to launch a novelty for a season or an event.
We try to innovate every year for the key moments of the year. Last Christmas, we created three new types of chocolate and a new environmentally friendly packaging: Christmas Cubes. We are currently thinking about our Easter range.
When the creative process stems from a client's request, I look for ideas and inspiration by walking around, looking at competitors' ranges, but not only at the chocolate makers: I seek inspiration in design, fashion, the luxury world, etc.
In any case, I determine a line of thought with the team and as soon as we have a more specific idea, we start testing, tasting, looking.
I also make my family take part in the process, asking their opinion, which always means a lot to me.
Could you sum up these three years of work? How would you like Genaveh to be within three years?
I couldn't have hoped for better. The brand quickly found loyal customers over the last three years and Genaveh has been chosen among the best chocolate makers in Luxembourg by the Gault&Millau guide! As for the team, all the collaborators stayed and were loyal, and other members were added to it. Our partners are attentive and always on the lookout for new products. We also successfully completed expansion work in record time, enabling us to get ready for the Christmas holiday season in our new premises. The website has found its niche and the shop in Steinfort gets busier and busier.
Within the next three years, a shop in the city would be a dream come true!
Editor's notes:
The interview took place at the end of 2020. Since then, the chocolate factory has continued to grow and now has a shop in Luxembourg City.
The interview has been edited and shortened for the purposes of the article.
Last update23.02.2026
For more information
Flavours
Your business in Luxembourg
The best plant-based restaurants in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/startup-ict-clubee.html
Clubee – an ICT startup story
Clubee is riding a wave of success. 6 years after its foundation in 2014 and 5 years after its participation in Fit4Start, this virtual assistant for clubs and volunteer organisations is branching out to multiple markets. Joining the Fit4Start initiative has enabled this company, started by friendsGillesMangenand TimWiltgen, to get off the launch pad.
Their idea was simple, yet revolutionary: what if clubs had a platform on which they could organise their members and communication, manage events, keep track of financial matters, do public relations and much more?
Luxembourg.lu: How difficult was it to evolve from an idea to a concrete project?
Gilles Mangen: In my opinion, it was a case of, we were young and we just decided to go for it.[laughs]
I won’t say that we were naive, but we simply went for it – we put our heads through the wall, so to speak. That helped a lot. At the same time, the first steps were rather simple to take, but we noticed rather quickly that popularity accelerates growth. And that’s where we spotted our biggest challenges: building a team, expanding to foreign countries, making the project bigger and more professional – we expanded from a 2 men team to 13 people. All of these are challenges that you have to meet on a daily basis.
Gilles Mangenis one of the two founders of Clubee.Born in 1989, he studied economy and management in Luxembourg and Montpellier (F). He's also a dedicated ice hockey player who used to play for Luxembourg's national team.
Tim Wiltgenis the second member of the founding team.. Born in 1990 and a long time amateur soccer player, he studied economy and entrepreneurship in Montpellier (F)  and Innsbruck (A).
So, what convinced you to join Fit4Start then?
GM:Fit4Start was a hugely positive experience for us. Before we participated in Fit4Start, we tried to get off the ground on our own, and this worked well for a while. However, we quickly saw that problems and challenges were rolling in, so that we eventually realised that getting yourself coached and mentored by people who can open your eyes and help you avoid certain pitfalls is a big advantage.
Eventually, we would have been able to master those challenges on our own I suppose, but that would maybe have been the ruin of the company. In that respect, the Fit4Start programme was super interesting. We were well coached and helped, which enabled us to evolve faster and reduce the number of mistakes in the process.
For 3 months, we were in an intensive programme, where we were surrounded by their business coaches and judges, who helped us tackle certain challenges, fix certain tracks along which we were going to evolve and helped us reflect on our own plans.
Did this affect your own view of your project?
GM:We were being challenged; our business model was being challenged. We were faced with all sorts of self-critical and productive questions. How fast did we want to enter which markets? And why? That’s just some of the topics that were broached. And I am quite sure that we avoided a whole series of pitfalls because they managed to raise our awareness through their input.
What enticed investors to support you?
GM:I think that everybody bought into the vision we had for our product. We solve a problem that cannot be ignored – there is a market that desperately needs our product. And finally, growth potential – the market is of significant size, there are over 5 million clubs worldwide who all face similar problems.
We want to help each of those clubs save over 250 hours of work annually. We do this by partially replacing human workforce with a virtual assistant. It’s not about replacing people, but about giving them the opportunity to concentrate their efforts on their club’s core business, instead of getting lost in administrative work, i.e. sending invoices. We want them to focus on creating value for their club and their members, instead of doing stupid, repetitive tasks. There is much potential for automation.
Clubee is basically a virtual assistant which takes over repetitive administrative work. The managers or volunteers take decisions, the assistant executes. The club continues doing what it does – Clubee just takes over some of the work.
You are about to go global – you have just opened an office in Berlin and are about to open an office in Paris. What are the next steps in your evolution?
GM:We want to get established on the markets where we already are present. Further down the road, we want to establish ourselves on the European and global markets. Our goal is to become a global company, not limited to Luxembourg or Europe.
What would you advise for other entrepreneurs who have not yet decided on how to proceed with their ideas?
GM:Good question. I guess, the fastest way to get off the ground is to simply get going and learn on the fly. And the other thing is more classical ‘Wien näischt mécht, deen näischt brécht’.
Just get going and try, and you’ll get some validation rather soon of whether your idea amounts to something, or not. It’s no use pondering whether or not to start something for years and years.
Last update07.02.2025
For more information
QTRobot - autistic children's friend
SpaceTech start-ups - conquering space from the Grand Duchy
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/fintech.html
FinTech, financial technologies in Luxembourg
ume– an example of an innovative technology enterprise.
umeis an innovative enterprise in theregulatory field of asset management. It was founded as a start-up in February 2017 and participated in the acceleration programmeFit 4 Startin autumn the same year.
Management companies have anobligation to understand the distribution and sales process of their funds. They carry outdue diligence reports, i.e. verifications of fund distributors carried out by a purchaser or an investor prior to enacting a transaction. Every company carries out such data collection via aspecific questionnaire.
umeoffers astandardisation of such dataas well as anautomation of the analysis of distributors. This way, all the stakeholders gain in efficiency and time. ume uses this structured information todevelop a global distributor baseand positions itself along the lines of "Trip Advisor"in the sphere of fund distribution.
Three questions for Laurent Denayer, CEO ofume
In 2017, you took part in theFit 4 Startandumehas been, out of over a hundred participants, one of the five selected start-ups for the training programme. Why did you want to take part in this competition?
We had analysed our market but we hadquestions regarding ourbusiness model.We are a worldwide information platform and weneeded to be challenged on our assumptions. It has also been an opportunity for us totranslate our visionof society and our aims into words.
How has the company developed since?
The development has beenvery fast-pacedfor us. We had athree-figure growth in 2018 and 2019, we areactive in 65 countriesacross the world and9 of the 50 largest fund managers are now our clients. We have also obtainedrecognition on several occasions: 2017Best Fintech start-upin Luxembourg, 2018Best Regtechin Luxembourg, Top 100 of the most innovativeRegtechsin the world.
What is your best advice for young entrepreneurs in today's financial technologies?
The financial sphere is a very complex one and you needto be surrounded by people with good knowledge and experience when it comes to the workings of the financial sector. The technological factor is certainly a distinctive element, butknowing your market is crucial.
A national platform for financial technologies
THE national platform and THE innovation centre dedicated toFintechis theLHoFT(Luxembourg House of Financial Technology). This financial technology centre favours innovation and the development of solutions toshape the future of financial services.It is responsible for thepromotionof the Fintech ecosystem, public authorities, research and universities, as well as for thestimulationof the development of specific sector-related products. The LHoFTconnects Fintech stakeholders from all over the worldand encouragesnational and international collaborations. It also helps foreign Fintech to set up, develop and establish the right connections in Luxembourg. The development of Fintech enterprises is supported byprivate and public funding sources, both during their creation and throughout their lifetime.
In 2021, the LHoFT Foundation is introducinga brand new series of Fintech development programs, grouped under the brand nameCATAPULT, to enable companies to grow to new heights. CATAPULT was developed in collaboration with theministry of the Economyand theDirectorate for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Affairsand is supported by key strategic partners. The brand is divided intotwo components:
Last update04.04.2025
For more information
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
QTRobot - autistic children's friend
SpaceTech start-ups - conquering space from the Grand Duchy
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/healthtech.html
QTRobot - autistic children's friend
The start-up LuxAI has developed a humanoid robot to improve the sociability of autistic children. QT acts as an interaction facilitator between therapists and young patients.
One person out of 150 is diagnosed with autism in Luxembourg. And according to World Health Organization (WHO) estimates, approximately 1 child out of 59 worldwide suffers from an autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Children with autism have difficulties communicating, as well as understanding what others think and feel. As a result, it is difficult for them to express themselves through words, body language, facial expressions and touch, to such an extent that it may seem that they are disconnected from the outside world. It is very challenging for therapists to help them get out of their bubble. They use their therapist robot assistant - QT - to help them create a link with the outside world.
Welcoming the QT Robot
Only a handful of social robots exist in the world at this point in time. The QT Robot is one of them. This small large-headed humanoid robot measuring around 20 inches tall wears a cosmonaut suit and has everything going for it to catch children's attention. In fact, QT - as in "Cutie" - is a therapeutic robot capable of showing emotions aimed at children with behavioural disorders.
QT was developed, assembled and programmed on the premises of the start-up LuxAI, and is 100% made in Luxembourg. Used in therapy centres in France and Luxembourg, it is specialised in interactions with autistic children and facilitates their integration in society. In real terms, it communicates in a simpler way than human beings. It makes it easier for autistic children to understand. But it also plays educational games with them and tells them stories.
This fun approach helps children acquire new emotions and skills such as social and communication skills. It can even add the corresponding body language. Its LCD face and robotised arms clearly show when it is ashamed or finds something repulsive, for example. It warmly praises the child after each successful activity.
The robot plays the role of mediator
During the sessions, the humanoid robot acts as a mediator between two people, in particular the therapist and a child suffering from an autistic spectrum disorder. By doing so, QT makes it easier for therapists to communicate a message to children, using an application on a tablet.
According to experiments, this triangular interaction between the robot, the therapist and the patient has proved to be very efficient to improve learning opportunities for children as well as communication with the therapist. Research even shows that children diagnosed with autism are highly interested in technology and prefer interactive robots to traditional toys.
But QT is much more than that. Based on AI technology, this little android is fully autonomous. Its energy is limitless and repeats activities as many times as children want. It is also easy to program and can create new games all by itself. According to its inventors, users without specific technological skills could easily program the QTRobot and adapt it to their needs.
The young Luxembourg based start-up, LuxAI, is a spin-off of the University of Luxembourg, and is currently "incubated" in the Lux Future Lab. This lab is mostly home to start-ups in FinTech or HealTech, such as LuxAI, which was founded by two Iranians - doctors Pouyan Ziafati and Aida Nazarikhorram. The first doctor is a specialist in robotics and AI who graduated from the universities of Luxembourg and Utrecht; the second is a doctor who was trained at the university of Hamadan (Iran).
The benefits of the robot (Video/Audio YouTube)
Robot helps autistic children develop social skills
QT Robot: a success story (Video/Audio YouTube)
Case in point: Nils's mother is convinced
3 questions to Dr. Aida Nazarikhorram, co-founder of LuxAI
1.For what purpose did you develop this robot?
The vision of LuxAI is building a future with Human-Centered Artificially Intelligent systems supporting the therapy, well-being and independence living of humans, especially vulnerable people such as children with developmental disorders and the elderly. QTrobot was developed with the mission of providing support for health and education professionals, to deliver a high-quality, scalable and affordable service to children with special needs and autism.
2.What is the resonance of the QTrobot with its beneficiaries?
Even though QTrobot is a relatively new product in the market, it has already attracted global attention and interest. Now there are many centres for training of children with autism as well as many research groups who are using QTrobot across the world in North America, Asia, Australia and of course Europe. Our customers are very satisfied, since they see a huge impact from using QT in their day to day work. They find the robot very easy to use and easy to customize based on their special needs. That’s why now a days, we receive many orders based on the recommendation of our customers.
3.Could social humanoid robots be the next societal revolution?
Social robots have a great potential to support humans in many domains of applications. In particular there is huge shortage of specialized care givers and health professionals, that cause a lot of challenges and frustration. Social robots such as QTrobot, by mass replicating standard training practices, can be a great source of support for scaling the service delivery in a high quality and social manner.
Last update07.07.2025
For more information
SpaceTech start-ups - conquering space from the Grand Duchy
FinTech, financial technologies in Luxembourg
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/spacetech.html
SpaceTech start-ups - conquering space from the Grand Duchy
The launch of theSpace Resourcesinitiative in 2016 and the creation of theLuxembourg Space Agencyin 2018 demonstrate the Grand Duchy's determination to create a solid, dynamic, innovative space sector and become a leading international player in the field.
The aim ofSpaceResources.luis to ensure that thespace resourcesexplored under its jurisdiction are used forpeaceful purposes, are gathered and usedsustainably, in compliance withinternational law, and in theinterests of humanity.
In this context, a number of companies and start-ups have sprung up in the Grand Duchy in recent years; they now form part of thenational action plan for 2020-2024 covering space science and technology.
Maana Electric - aiming for green space technology
Among these start-ups,Maana Electricproposes developing anautonomous system for producing solar panelsusing resources availablein situ, i.e.regolith on the Moon and sand on Earth.
Maana Electric (Video/Audio YouTube)
Joost van Oorschot, CEO de Maana Electric: une introduction au projet
Maana Electric is proposing TerraBox, a totally automated factory capable of producing solar panels using nothing more than sand and electricity.
What are the mainassetsof Maana Electric's project?
Firstly, it involves the production ofcheap solar panels. Using cheap raw materials and their own electricity reduces the cost of producing the panels considerably. This makes any projects associated with photo-voltaic technology economically viable.
Secondly, the fact thatproductionis essentiallylocal: their technology makes it possible to use any kind of sand (one third of planet Earth is covered with sand!) and their factories are portable, which impacts the reduction of emissions caused by transport.
That means the start-up is capable of producing solar panelswith no emission of greenhouses gases. So the project would make it possible not only to develop space technologies but also provide a speedy transition to renewable energy, thereby helping to curb global warming.
A dynamic space eco-system is taking shape
The2020 Space Directoryprovides an updated and thorough image of the space industry in the Grand Duchy, with around60 research companies and bodiespresent in the Grand Duchy employing more than800 people.
Thefutureof the sector looks bright. In fact theFit 4 Start acceleration programmehas opened a vertical dedicated to the sector: theautumn 2019edition included thefirst five start-ups in the space field: 3Dfarms (USA), GlobeEye (France), Ilumbra (Luxembourg), RespectUs (Luxembourg) and WEO (Germany). In addition, the10th edition of Fit 4 Start has selected five start-ups connected with the space field, but this time broadening the range to include other sub-sectors:SatCom(telecommunications satellite),Earth Observation,Navigation,Space Resources,Space Security,Space Cyber-securityandScience. The following were selected: Numer8 (Czech Republic), OKAPI:Orbits (Germany), Celestial Space Technologies (Germany), SPiN (Germany) et Vingineers (France). The start-ups resulting from the11th editionof the acceleration programme inspring 2021will undoubtedly confirm the dynamism of the space sector in Luxembourg.
There is also theUniversity of Luxembourg'slaunch of anInterdisciplinary Space Master, demonstrating the Grand Duchy's commitment to the development of expertise in key areas. This Master, unique in Europe, has been in place since the autumn of 2019; it aims to provide students with the necessary engineering skills for the space industry, and the knowledge needed for managing space-related activities.
Last update07.02.2025
For more information
Aerospace
Luxembourg with one foot on the moon
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/ecosysteme-start-up.html
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
For innovative start-ups, the Grand Duchy is an attractive choice, with simplified access to decision-makers in both the public and private sectors and the availability of dedicated support. It's a dynamic international environment, centred on the business sector.  The Grand Duchy is multilingual, multicultural and diversified; for start-ups, it can be used as an ideal test market for developing concepts and testing new products and services before an international launch.
Start-ups, incubators and accelerators
The 'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system currently includesmore than 500 start-ups(mainly active in FinTech, InduTech, CleanTech and HealthTech, as well as automobile, space and cyber-security technologies) andmore than 15 incubators and accelerators, with financial assistance available at each stage of maturity and dozens of events devoted to the creation of businesses.
There is a special focus on technology:
Since the creation of thefirst incubator –Technoport– in 1998, other public and private initiatives  have been established.Luxinnovation,House of Startups, andLuxembourg House of Financial Technology(LHoFT) offer a varied range of support for young entrepreneurs.House of Entrepreneurshiprun by the Chamber of Commerce, and the not-for-profit association nyuko are also part of this entrepreneurial eco-system, as is theUniversity of Luxembourgand other research, industry and health structures.
A gateway and events not to be missed
There arethree major start-up eventsin the Grand Duchy each year:
The 'Startup Luxembourg' initiative launched by the Ministry of the Economy and Luxinnovation, is your gateway to the Grand Duchy's start-up universe. There, you will find all the relevant actors along with very specific information on the aid and support that the country offers to start-ups, as well as the Grand Duchy's complete Tech calendar.
Over the past decades, the Grand Duchy has constantly opened up to new ideas, innovated, and reinvented its economy by continually adapting to the changes and challenges raised by developments in the economic framework.The Grand Duchy's economy has seen regular growth, above the average for the European Union.
Thewww.startupluxembourg.complatform serves to highlight the Luxembourgish ecosystem and its players, to improve its international visibility and to facilitate contacts and business opportunities.
Last update20.10.2025
For more information
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
Investment aid
Key sectors
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/17-house-startups.html
House of Startups: the link in the start-up eco-system
The Grand Duchy is keen to become a start-up nation. The adventure began a few years ago with the emergence of the first incubators for new innovative companies. The number of accompanying structures has increased, and there are currently about fifteen incubators, witnesses to the Grand Duchy's innovative dynamism.
One of these incubators, helping start-ups to develop, is to be found inmodern offices near the main railway station, opposite the current headquarters of ArcelorMittal. House of Startups (HoST) chose the 'Dôme' building for its installation,occupying 6,000 sq.m. of attractive and well equipped premiseswith a top-class IT infrastructure. Conference rooms and meeting areas encourage entrepreneurs to work, interact, and present their ideas.
House of Startups brings together incubators, accelerators and innovation hubs. In all, it is capable of hostingbetween 150 and 200 innovative start-ups. That would be a summary definition of House of Startups, which provides a single address forseveral hubs, includingLuxembourg House of Financial Technology (LHoFT),Luxembourg-City Incubator (LCI),Hub@LuxembourgandInternational Climate Finance Accelerator Luxembourg (ICFA).
A nerve centre for innovation
With the backing of theCity of Luxembourg and the Chamber of Commerce, House of Startups was created with a view to becoming one of the largest incubators in the Grand Duchy, with themissionof serving as a federating force for theinnovation eco-system. At the inauguration of House of Startups, which opened its doors on 1 June 2018, Carlo Thelen, Director General of the Grand Duchy's Chamber of Commerce said, 'Hosting all the key players in the start-up eco-system will make it possible for ideas to circulate freely and bring innovations to life'.
Until January 2020, the HoST was headed by Karin Schintgen, previously in charge of Lux Futur Lab at BGL-BNP Paribas. In a short interview, the CEO of House of Startups explained the missions and objectives of the new institution and pointed out the advantages of this meeting place for entrepreneurs with a vision.
Three questions for Karin Schintgen,  Ex-CEO of House of Startups
1. You don't just rent offices to start-ups. House of Startups also accompanies innovative businesses in their start-up phase. What are HoST's missions?
House of Startups is a campus for incubators, accelerators and innovation hubs which in turn rent directly to start-ups.  We are trying to bring together and federate at House of Startups a whole host of all the players in the eco-system who are all involved in different or complementary tech sectors, in addition to what is already being done: FinTech with LHoFT (Luxembourg House of Fintech);  UrbanTech, commerce, tourism, environment, logistics, construction at LCI (Luxembourg City Incubator); climate funding  at ICFA (International Climate Finance Accelerator); maritime and space technology, FinTech, cyber-security, etc. at the hub operated by the Crédit Agricole group.
HoST's mission is to be a driving force for Innovation in the Grand Duchy by federating, promoting, supporting and catalysing the eco-system and world of the country's businesses.
On January 1stthe House of Startups has changed its governance. The CEO of HoST,Karin Schintgen, has handed over toPhilippe Linster, who will join the Chamber of Commerce in 2017. Karin Schintgen will remain an independent consultant to the House of Startups, with particular responsibility for international partnerships. In particular, she will develop EU Tribe, a network of incubators in the Greater Region.
2. How do you judge the evolution of the start-up eco-system in the Grand Duchy in recent years? In what areas would like to see new start-ups emerge?
I would say that amazing progress has been made in terms of both the offer of space and support (coaching, funding, marketing, etc.). Recent years have also seen a lot of specialisation, particularly in the direction of finance, which was a necessity in the aftermath of 2008, and more recently towards SpaceTech, which is also a necessity in as much as the Grand Duchy's survival depends on the country constantly reinventing itself. Obviously I think it's important to consolidate all that and continue developing our skills in so-called transverse technologies such as cyber-security and artificial intelligence. In addition, I would like to see more strong tech centres develop in sectors  such as retailing, tourism, town planning and construction, education, logistics, etc. Progress is also needed in terms of funding this economy – at present, it's in the hands of the public authorities and financiers such as VC operators. I think we need to find a way of involving the public and young people, otherwise Luxembourgers will become passive spectators of their own economy.
3. How is HoST positioned in the Greater Region? How do start-ups set up in the Grand Duchy take advantage of any cooperation there may be with the neighbouring countries?
The Grand Duchy's Chamber of Commerce is a very dynamic player in the Greater Region, so it came to me quite naturally as an idea that this historical and economic reality could be applied to the world of start-ups. A start-up doesn't think in terms of local markets, since one of the main factors in the success of start-up models is their 'scalability' - their ability to replicate their economic model on other markets. The Greater Region offers a market of  11 million people as well as more than sixty incubators and major centres for research and skills in Europe. It you take a close look you see a real technological megalopolis capable - as long as it is organised - of competing on a coherent platform with the major capitals such as Paris and Berlin. It's essential that we manage to keep the talents and skills that we have in our regions, and it's also essential that we attract foreign businesses and investors to this technological market. This can only be successful if we pool our forces. That's what's involved in the EU-TRIBE project, which currently includes about twenty incubators in the Greater Region (Rhineland, Saarland, Lorraine, Wallonia, and the Grand Duchy)
How to set up a business in Luxembourg
Aimed at national and foreign entrepreneurs and investors, the brochure 'How to set up a business in Luxembourg - Factsheets' explains in a clear and concise manner, step by step, the main administrative and organisational procedures for setting up in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. The publication thus gives an overview of the most important procedures and regulations and provides useful information and contacts for (future) entrepreneurs.
Last update07.02.2025
For more information
'Startup Luxembourg' eco-system
Key sectors
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/start-up-luxembourg.html
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Are you looking for a gateway to Europe, a test market for a new service or product, or a strong industrial or academic partner? Luxembourg's start-up ecosystem has taken a quantum leap in the past few years. Today, it is an investment hub attracting increasingly more innovative start-ups and companies that want to consider their operations onto a different scale.
In the heart of Europe
Ideally located in Central Europe and benefiting from a multilingual culture,Luxembourg is the perfect location for start-ups that wish to tackle Europe's major markets, such as France and Germany. It represents a very interesting test market, especially when it comes to high potential technologies such as 5G.
Given its very open business environment - you can create a company in English, French or German - every start-up can benefit from support at all levels through access to a large number of incubation options, a network of decision-makers and diverse public and private funding opportunities.
Research and data
Aside from the entrepreneurial factor, Luxembourg has anoptimal and dynamic research infrastructure. It consists of auniversityand four research institutes active in the following sectors: information and communication technologies (ICT), industry and health.
Luxembourg's economy counts on digital data to grow. All of the services and products designed in connection with data benefit from acute attention, in particular when they are created by start-ups. Luxembourg is one of the countries that took part in the European initiativeEuroHPC. Soon, it will have its own high-performance computer infrastructure.
Luxembourg's start-ups today
The ecosystem is currently made up of350 start-ups, as well as approximately fifteen incubators and three major start-up meetings per year:
Startup Luxembourgis your gateway to the realm of start-ups in Luxembourg. There, you will find all the relevant actors along with very specific information on aid and support that the country offers to start-ups, as well as Luxembourg's entireTechcalendar.
How to set up a business in Luxembourg
Aimed at national and foreign entrepreneurs and investors, the brochure 'How to set up a business in Luxembourg - Factsheets' explains in a clear and concise manner, step by step, the main administrative and organisational procedures for setting up in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. The publication thus gives an overview of the most important procedures and regulations and provides useful information and contacts for (future) entrepreneurs.
Last update13.02.2025
For more information
Innovation
Key sectors
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg/investment-aid.html
Investment aid
Luxembourg offers a whole range of aid measures to promote innovation and entrepreneurship. Aside from standard financial aid to foster investments in research and development (R&D) for companies, many public players offer tailor-made consulting to future entrepreneurs and start-ups in order to make their innovative ideas come to life.
Start-up nation
Start-ups are a vital driver for the development of a country's economy, the creation of new jobs and the promotion of innovation.Luxembourg pursues its efforts with a view to being recognised as a 'Start-up Nation'.
The development of an ecosystemfavouring the appearance of innovative start-ups in Luxembourgis a crucial element to successfully establish an effective policy of economic diversification in key technological sectors such as information and communication technologies, health technologies, sustainable technologies, the space sector, logistics and the industry 4.0.
Delivering exemplary projects in the context of hosting infrastructures (incubators) and thefinancing of start-ups through various tools such as the acceleration, funding and support programmeFit 4 Startor investment funds (SNCI Bank'sDigital Tech Fund or Luxembourg Futur Fund) are key elements to implement this diversification strategy.
Luxembourg pursues its efforts towards its start-up ecosystem and continues to gain visibility both nationally and internationally so as to attract technological entrepreneurs, investors and start-ups on its territory.
Clusters
Luxembourghas developed theCluster Initiativein sectors considered asa priority for the promotion of its economy's diversification. The aim is to stimulate innovation and forge stronger links between companies within the same sector as well as to promote relations between companies and public research structures.
These clusters focus primarily on economicsectors with high added valuefor Luxembourg, such as, in particular:
Incubators
Today, Luxembourg is home to awhole ecosystemof public and private incubators, which support future entrepreneurs every step of the way.
They provide assistance and appropriate guidance for the development of new projects, thereby facilitating their growth and development. They also act as intermediaries by offering temporary hosting solutions to national and international start-ups that want to go into business in Luxembourg.
Innovation aid
Luxembourg offers several public aids aimed at encouraging research, development and innovation activities, in particular within the framework of the law of 6th of June, 2025.Companies are therefore spoilt for choice andLuxinnovation, the national innovation agency, offers free support to help them find the best tools according to their specific needs. Consequently, national companies are supported and encouraged to innovate and develop in order to address the technological challenges and opportunities that the future entails.
Last update08.10.2025
For more information
Innovation
Key sectors
Competitiveness
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/ap-theatre.html
About ... Theatre in Luxemburg
This brochure provides a succinct history of the development of theater in Luxembourg since the nineteenth century. It then focuses on today's theater scene and gives an overview of the various theater stages in Luxembourg.
Other languages
A propos ... du théâtre au Luxembourg
La brochure présente l’histoire succincte de l’évolution de l’offre théâtrale depuis le XIXe siècle. Elle s’attarde ensuite sur le théâtre de nos jours et fait un rapide tour d’horizon des différentes salles de spectacle du Grand-Duché de Luxembourg.
Apropos ... Theater in Luxemburg
Die Publikation erläutert die Entwicklung des Theaters in Luxemburg seit dem neunzehnten Jahrhundert. Sie konzentriert sich dann auf die heutige Theaterszene und liefert einen Überblick über die verschiedenen Theaterbühnen Luxemburgs.
Last update24.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support.html
Support
Sub-sections
Last update10.09.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/aspects-legaux.html#donnees
Legal aspects
Table of contents
Editor of the portal
The portal is the official presentation website of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg. As the Grand Duchy's international business card on the web, it gives a unique and non-commercial access to information about the country.
The portal is the property of the Luxembourg State, represented by the Government's Information and Press Service (Service information et presse, SIP). The Information and Press Service contributes to this portal in order to promote public access to information about the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
General Terms and Conditions of Use (GTCU) of the website.
Any person using the information, documents, products, software and/or services (hereinafter collectively referred to as the"Services") offered by this website shall be deemed to be aware of, and to have accepted, all the provisions of these general terms and conditions of use.
"Body"means the government authority, ministry, administration, or any other government organisation that is solely or jointly responsible for this portal.​
User obligations
The portal is accessible via the internet. The user declares that they are aware of the risks involved and accept those risks. They must guard against the effects of computer hacking by implementing suitable and secure computer settings.​
The Luxembourg State accepts no liability for any loss or damage which the user may suffer, directly or indirectly, in connection with browsing on this website or using the services which it offers, or from accessing any of the other internet websites to which it refers.
Use of the portal is free.​
Cookies management
This portal uses client-side cookies. These are small text files that are used to analyse users' browsing patterns and habits (frequency and duration of visits, pages viewed, etc.).​
They are sent by the portal and stored in a special folder on the user's computer. In particular, they contain the name of the server that wrote it, an identifier in the form of a unique number and an expiry date. The unique identifier allows the website to "remember" the user's computer whenever they visit the website. Session cookies are deleted from the user's computer when the session is closed. However, persistent cookies remain on the user's computer for one month after the end of the session.
The user can decide whether or not to allow the portal to store cookies on their computer. They may change their browser settings at any time to prevent cookies from being accepted and stored. Additionally, from their browser, the user can delete any cookies that have already been stored on their computer (see the Cookies Policy).
The use of certain features of this site may be limited or disabled if the user does not accept cookies from the website. Hence, it is recommended that users update their browser settings to accept cookies from the website.
Modification of the portal
The Luxembourg State reserves the right to develop, modify or suspend this website, without prior notice, for maintenance or updating purposes or for any other reason which may be considered necessary.
In particular, the Luxembourg State may at any time withdraw, add, supplement or clarify all or any part of the information and Services contained in or offered on this website. The Luxembourg State may not be held liable for any direct or indirect damage in connection with such modifications.
General limitations of liability​
The Luxembourg State will use its best endeavours to ensure that this website is as widely available as possible. However, it accepts no liability should the website become temporarily or wholly unavailable.
The Luxembourg State will use its best endeavours to ensure the security of the computer system. However, it accepts no liability in the event of a cyber attack or the website becoming temporarily or wholly unavailable.
The Luxembourg State will use its best endeavours to ensure that the information published on the portal and on social networks is accurate. However, it may not be held liable, in particular in the event of omission to update information or a form, in the event of errors in the handling of the system or encoding, inaccuracies, gaps in the information provided or any errors or inaccuracies. The aim is to disseminate accurate, up-to-date information emanating from a variety of sources, but the Luxembourg State is unable to avoid all risks of material error. None of the information published on this portal should be considered as exhaustive or as a commitment from the State. Simplified versions and translations are provided for information only. Only legal texts published in the Mémorial (Official Journal of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg) shall be deemed authoritative. The information appearing on this portal is of a general nature. It is not tailored to personal or specific circumstances, and therefore cannot be regarded as constituting personal, professional or legal advice to the user. If the user needs personal or specific advice, they should always consult the competent departments within the different administrative bodies.​
Limitations of the portal's liability​
The portal expressly cannot accept liability for any consequences, whether direct or indirect, arising from:​
Links to related sites​
For users' convenience, this portal may contain links to other websites which they may find useful or interesting. The Luxembourg State, and more specifically the "Body", does not systematically monitor the content of those websites. Consequently, they may not be held liable for the content of those websites, and particularly for the legality or accuracy of such content.
Intellectual property
The portal, all the elements contained therein (including the layout), and the information and services are protected by the relevant intellectual property and copyright laws.
Unless otherwise stated, the copyright on the content of the portal is held by the State of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.​
Unless otherwise specified, the Luxembourg State grants no license or authorisation with regard to the intellectual property rights which it holds in respect of the portal, the elements it contains, or the Services. Furthermore, the services may not be reproduced in full or in part, in any form whatsoever, and using any means whatsoever, without first obtaining written authorisation from the Body.
Unless otherwise specified, the user is authorised to consult, download and print the documents and information available under the following conditions:​
The above rights that are implicitly and explicitly granted to users constitute authorisation of use and in no way constitute a transfer of ownership of rights, property or anything else in respect to this portal.
For all use other than as stipulated above, please contact us using the  contact form.
Changes to the General Terms and Conditions of Use
These general terms and conditions of use maybe modified or supplemented at any time, without prior notice, in line with changes made to this website or changes in the law, or for any other reason which may be considered necessary. It is the responsibility of the users to acquaint themselves with the general terms and conditions of use of this site, of which only the most up-to-date version accessible online shall be deemed to be in force. It is possible that, in the interval between two visits to the portal, the general terms and conditions of use may have changed, and thus it is the user's responsibility to read through those conditions before using the portal once again.
Applicable law and competent courts
Any dispute concerning the use of this portal and its Services shall be subject to Luxembourg law and shall fall within the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg.
Precisions on the terms and conditions of use of the application "Emoxies"
The emoxies.lu website, the Emoxies application and their content are the property of the Luxembourg State, represented by the Ministry of the Economy.
Unless otherwise specified, the user is authorised to consult, download or print documents of the image (Emoxies) and animated image (GIF Emoxies) type without prior request.
The application and the website are intended for personal, non-commercial use. Any use of the content of the website, the application or any other element composing the website and the application outside this personal and private use requires the prior written authorisation of the Ministry of the Economy.
The rights granted to you, implicitly or explicitly, constitute an authorisation for use and in no case an assignment of rights, property or otherwise relating to this website and the application.
For all uses other than those stipulated above, please send us your request by email toinfo@imagedemarque@eco.etat.lu.
If the user notices an anomaly or encounters any problems with the application, they are invited to inform us by means of the following email address:info@imagedemarque@eco.etat.lu.
In general, for any complaint, the user can contact the publisher of the website and the application at the following address:info@imagedemarque@eco.etat.luand the following phone number:​ (+352) 247-72436.
Personal data protection.
General information
The personal data communicated by the user are processed in accordance withRegulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
The Luxembourg State collects no personal data other than the IP addresses contained in the server logs. These are collected for security reasons. User consent is not required before visiting this portal.
The controller for these processing operations is the "Body" that is responsible for this portal.​
Users can file claims relating to the protection of their personal data through the various communication channels available, and directly to the controller who, in this case, is the "Body" responsible for this portal. Users can also file claims with the "Body"'s data protection officer at the following email address:dataprotection@sip.etat.lu. The user may also contact theNational Commission for Data Protection, located at 15 Boulevard du Jazz, L-4370 Belvaux, for any dispute in this area.
Portal contact form​
The information about you collected through the portal contact form needs to be processed by the "Body" concerned  to deal with your request.​
By filling in the form, you agree that your personal data may be processed as part of the processing of your request. The data are retained by the "Body" in question for as long as needed to achieve the purpose of the processing operation(s).
As the retention period for personal data depends on the type of request, the "Body" will communicate the applicable retention period, or the criteria used to determine it, on request, on a case-by-case basis.​
The recipient of your data is the "Body" responsible for processing your request. Please contact the "Body" you are filing your request/application with to find out who the recipients of the data in this form are.
Under the terms of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, you have the right to access, rectify and, where applicable, request the erasure of any information relating to you.​ You are also entitled to withdraw your consent at any time.​
Additionally, unless the processing of your personal data is compulsory, you may, with legitimate reasons, oppose the processing of such data.
If you wish to exercise these rights and/or obtain a record of the information held about you, please contact the concerned "Body" using the contact details provided on the form. You also have the option of filing a complaint with the National Commission for Data Protection, located at 15 Boulevard du Jazz, L-4370 Belvaux.
Processing related to audience measurement​
Certain data relating to the user's hardware and software, which are not capable of revealing the user's identity, are collected when they visit the public-domain portal. The sole purpose of collecting such data is to garner statistics on website traffic (type of browser, resolution, approximate location, and so on) in order to provide users with the best possible experience.
The user's full IP address is not retained under any circumstances. Only part of the IP address is retained for the purpose of computing overall statistics, and there is no way of identifying users.
This data is retained and hosted in Europe, in a solution provided by a subcontractor – specifically, Adobe Systems Inc. – who, as such, is subject to the same legal obligations regarding the protection of personal data, if this data were to be harvested in the future.​
The data are retained for no longer than is necessary to observe how audiences evolve as a function of browser use, resolution settings or other available statistical data.​
The controller for these processing operations is the "Body" responsible for this website.​
Processing related to online surveys​
Users' data is harvested, with their permission, for the sole purposes of conducting surveys for the State's administrative bodies. In addition, technical audience-measurement data are collected at the same time.
The data is retained for the duration of the survey, plus a few weeks for the results to be statistically analysed.​
These surveys are conducted directly on the website of a subcontractor – specifically, surveygizmo.eu, developed by Widgix Limited – located in the United States. The data is hosted in Europe. That subcontractor is subject to the same legal obligations regarding the protection of personal data, as the surveys are carried out for or by users from the European Union.
The procedures by which these surveys are carried out are such that none of the collected data can be used to personally identify the user. Even by combining technical identifier data (IP address or information about the user's browser or device) and data harvested from multiple surveys, the subcontractor operating the platform would still be unable to personally identify the users.
The data controller and the data recipient is the "Body" responsible for the portal, and which commissioned the survey.​
Processing linked to newsletter management
The email address provided by the user when they sign up for the website newsletter will be shared with a subcontractor for the sole purpose of disseminating the newsletter. That subcontractor – Mailjet, based in Paris, France – is subject to the same legal obligations with regard to the protection of personal data. To prevent abuse of the system, the user must confirm their subscription by clicking on a link sent to the email address they provided.
The user may unsubscribe at any time using a link provided in each email, or by contacting the "Body" responsible for the website. In the event of problems using the newsletter, the user must also contact the Body responsible for the site.  The user's data will not be kept for longer than their subscription lasts.
The controller for these processing operations is the "Body" responsible for this website.​
Presence on the social networks
Moderation policy​
Any user who joins this website's social-networks community undertakes to refrain from any form of discrimination based on race, ethnic origin, religion, gender, sexual orientation, age, nationality, disability, marital or employment status.​
Comments which are insulting, racist, sexist or offensive have no place on the social networks. They will be deleted and reported.
Languages
The primary language used by this website on the social networks is English and/or French. Depending on the situation and on the target audiences, information may be published in the other two national languages (German and Luxembourgish).
As far as possible, replies to all questions and comments will be in the user's language.
Last update24.02.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/support/newsletter.html
Newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
Last update17.09.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/arts-and-culture.html
Arts and culture
Arts and culture
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/artistic-creation.html
Artistic creation
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/innovation.html
Innovation
Innovation
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/sports.html
Sports
Sports
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/quality-of-life.html
Quality of life
Quality of life
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/history.html
History
History
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions.html
Regions
Regions
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/flavours.html
Flavours
Flavours
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/statec-le-luxembourg-en-chiffres.html
Luxembourg in figures
Brochure, edition 2025
Other languages
Le Luxembourg en chiffres
Brochure, édition 2025
Luxemburg in Zahlen
Broschüre, Ausgabe 2025
Last update14.10.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/ap-histoire.html
About... the History of Luxembourg
This brochure traces the development of Luxembourg from the 10th century to the present day. A timeline running through the brochure highlights the key dates of the history of Luxembourg. A QR code at the end of the brochure takes readers to a website containing useful links, thus allowing those interested to delve further into some of the aspects covered in the brochure.
Other languages
À propos... de l'histoire du Luxembourg
Cette brochure retrace l'évolution du Luxembourg du Xe siècle à nos jours. Une timeline présente au fil des pages les dates-clés de l'histoire du Luxembourg. Un code QR qui figure en fin de brochure renvoie vers un site avec des liens utiles, permettant ainsi au lecteur intéressé d’approfondir l'un ou l'autre aspect des sujets abordés dans cette publication.
Apropos... Geschichte Luxemburgs
Diese Broschüre zeichnet die Entwicklung Luxemburgs vom 10. Jahrhundert bis zur Gegenwart nach. Eine Zeitleiste, die sich durch die Broschüre zieht, hebt die wichtigsten Daten der luxemburgischen Geschichte hervor. Ein QR-Code am Ende der Broschüre führt den Leser zu einer Website mit nützlichen Links, so dass der Interessierte einige der in der Broschüre behandelten Aspekte weiter vertiefen kann.
Last update30.03.2026
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/languages.html
Languages
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/ap-langues.html
About... Languages in Luxembourg
Language usage in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg – 2025
Other languages
À propos... des langues au Luxembourg
L’usage linguistique dans le Grand-Duché de Luxembourg - 2025
Apropos... Sprachen in Luxemburg
Der Sprachgebrauch im Großherzogtum Luxemburg - 2025
À propos... Sproochen zu Lëtzebuerg
De Sproochgebrauch zu Lëtzebuerg - 2025
Last update19.09.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/sproch-vun-der-woch.html
© SIP
À la une
Gault&Millau Luxembourg 2026: les meilleurs chefs, restaurants et bars
Le guide Gault&Millau choisit les meilleurs restaurants et brasseries, les adresses H!P, les bars incontournables et la fleur des chocolatiers luxembourgeois. Découvrez les lauréats 2026 et les nouveautés du guide dédié au Luxembourg!
Nature pour tous: les sentiers de randonnée confort
Avec les sentiers de randonnée confort, le Luxembourg ouvre une fenêtre à l'inclusion dans le domaine de la nature. Situés à Bissen, Remich, Echternach, Grevenmacher et Redange-sur-Attert, ils permettent à tous de profiter des activités en plein air.
Top courses à pied au Luxembourg
Envie de rester en forme tout en visitant les quatre coins du Luxembourg? Voici une petite sélection de courses à pied pour combiner sport et évasion tout au long de l'année!
Production théâtrale - variée, diversifiée et internationale
Quand il s’agit de parler de théâtre au Luxembourg, on peut facilement dire qu’il y en a pour tous les goûts. Du théâtre amateur à la venue de la prestigieuse troupe professionnelle à portée internationale, le pays, aussi restreint soit-il, peut se targuer d’une programmation hétéroclite qui n’a rien à envier aux grandes métropoles internationales.
Luxembourg au féminin: voix, parcours, visions
Chaque année, le 8 mars, la Journée internationale des femmes offre un moment privilégié pour rendre hommage à celles qui, par leur talent, leur courage ou leur vision, ont transformé et transforment encore notre société. Cette journée invite à revisiter les luttes essentielles menées par les femmes à travers l'histoire, à célébrer leurs réalisations d'hier et d'aujourd'hui, mais aussi à encourager celles qui écrivent déjà le futur. Un temps fort qui s'inscrit dans la continuité des engagements que le Luxembourg porte tout au long de l'année.
À cette occasion, nous vous proposons une série d'articles et d'interviews consacrés à des femmes remarquables — certaines luxembourgeoises, d'autres venues d'ailleurs mais qui ont choisi le Luxembourg pour y développer leur vie, leur métier ou leurs passions. Leurs parcours sont multiples, leurs voix uniques, leurs contributions essentielles.
Découvrez et célébrez les femmes qui ont marqué le Luxembourg d'hier, qui l'animent aujourd'hui et qui l'imaginent demain.
Le printemps est dans l'air
Respirez le printemps! C'est le moment idéal pour s'immerger dans la nature et vivre le renouveau des forêts, la floraison multicolore des plantes, le réveil des animaux en hibernation et le retour des espèces migratrices. Les villes s'épanouissent aussi et le soleil printanier invite à les parcourir à pied ou à vélo. Dans les quatre coins du pays, quel que soit votre âge et votre condition physique, des espaces verts et des activités en plein air vous attendent.
Minett
Le sud du Luxembourg, appelé les Terres rouges ou le Minett, doit son nom à la couleur rougeâtre du sol, liée à la présence de minerai de fer qui domine le paysage. C’est une région profondément marquée par son riche passé sidérurgique.
Encore aujourd’hui, de nombreux vestiges subsistent dans le paysage, faisant de ce territoire un véritable musée à ciel ouvert, où la nature a peu à peu repris ses droits. Les friches industrielles ont trouvé une nouvelle vie en devenant des espaces culturels, des quartiers urbains et des lieux éducatifs. Dans cette dynamique de renouveau, le Minett s’est littéralement mué de terre rouge en véritable terre de sciences, devenant un pôle majeur d’innovation et de recherche.
Grâce son paysage varié, le sud offre également de nombreuses possibilités de loisirs en pleine nature. Fêtes populaires, festivals de musique et d’art, concerts ou expositions rythment la vie culturelle de la région.
Faces of Luxembourg
Episode #26: Pascale Seil - souffleuse de verre et artiste
Faces of Luxembourg#26 - Pascale Seil (Vidéo YouTube)
Et si la nature n'était pas seulement un décor… mais la source même de votre art? Dans notre nouvel épisode de Faces of Luxembourg, nous rencontrons Pascale Seil, souffleuse de verre et artiste. Depuis son atelier dans le Mullerthal, UNESCO Global Geopark, Pascale puise son inspiration dans la nature du Luxembourg: ses couleurs, ses textures, et la façon dont elle se transforme au fil des saisons. Tout cela se reflète dans ses créations en verre…
Episode #25: Dominique Santana - chercheuse et réalisatrice
Faces of Luxembourg#25: Dominique Santana (Vidéo YouTube)
Et si l'histoire n'était pas seulement quelque chose qui se lit… mais aussi quelque chose qui se vit? Dans notre nouvel épisode de Faces of Luxembourg, nous partons à la rencontre de Dominique Santana, chercheuse et réalisatrice. Née au Luxembourg et d'origine brésilienne, elle est passionnée par les histoires qui nous relient à travers l'espace et le temps. Son travail mêle cinéma, outils numériques et narration transmédia pour créer des écosystèmes médiatiques qui permettent de découvrir l'histoire autrement. Ce qui la motive? Rendre l'histoire plus inclusive et donner une place à celles et ceux que l'on entend peu.
Top 5: le Luxembourg en bref
Joyaux touristiques, faits marquants historiques ou histoires insolites - nos articles Top 5 rangent mois par mois parmi les plus convoités par nos lecteurs. Les voici arrangés pour votre plaisir.
Dernière modification le27.03.2026
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/sproch-vun-der-woch/2020/vill-gleck-neie-joer.html
Sproch vun der Woch
Vill Gléck am Neie Joer
Happy New Year!
Luxembourgish expression with which people welcome each other in the new year. According to the original expression you also wish someone a wig made of goat hair. The origins of that part of the New Year's greeting lie, luckily perhaps, hidden in the fogs of Luxembourg's history of language and customs."Iech alleguer vill Gléck am neie Joer!"
Luxembourgish expression with which people welcome each other in the new year. According to the original expression you also wish someone a wig made of goat hair. The origins of that part of the New Year's greeting lie, luckily perhaps, hidden in the fogs of Luxembourg's history of language and customs.
"Iech alleguer vill Gléck am neie Joer!"
Sproch vun der Woch
To reprimand somebody (Literally: I'm going to straighten his semaphore)
Perhaps the result of the importance of Luxembourg's railroads in the 20th century, this expression is used when you are displeased with somebody and wish to talk to them about it."Wat erlaabt dee sech? Ech ginn deem emol den Diks riichten!"
Perhaps the result of the importance of Luxembourg's railroads in the 20th century, this expression is used when you are displeased with somebody and wish to talk to them about it.
"Wat erlaabt dee sech? Ech ginn deem emol den Diks riichten!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Delighted
Enchantéiertis a Luxembourgish adaptation of the French wordEnchantéand means exactly the same thing: a polite greeting, usually when being presented to a person for the first time."Ech mengen, mir kennen eis nach net. Enchantéiert!"
Enchantéiertis a Luxembourgish adaptation of the French wordEnchantéand means exactly the same thing: a polite greeting, usually when being presented to a person for the first time.
"Ech mengen, mir kennen eis nach net. Enchantéiert!"
Sproch vun der Woch
To scold somebody
This expression cannot really be translated into any other language: it as about scolding somebody 'Schëmmel', which is a white horse, and 'Bless', which is the Luxembourgish word for a white spot that horses or cows my have on their head."En hat eng ganz Palett fale gelooss a gouf vum Viraarbechter Schëmmel a Bless vernannt."
This expression cannot really be translated into any other language: it as about scolding somebody 'Schëmmel', which is a white horse, and 'Bless', which is the Luxembourgish word for a white spot that horses or cows my have on their head.
"En hat eng ganz Palett fale gelooss a gouf vum Viraarbechter Schëmmel a Bless vernannt."
Sproch vun der Woch
May wreath
1 May custom which consists in the weaving of young twigs and their leaves to wreaths. These are then hung up on houses and buildings aslucky charms. This also inaugurates theMaitrankseason, a very popular beverage in Luxembourg and the region around the Belgian town of Arlon, which is made of white wine and sweet-scented bedstraw. And which, by the way, should be consumed moderately."D'Musek geet muer den Owend an de Bësch fir de Meekranz ze maachen."
1 May custom which consists in the weaving of young twigs and their leaves to wreaths. These are then hung up on houses and buildings aslucky charms. This also inaugurates theMaitrankseason, a very popular beverage in Luxembourg and the region around the Belgian town of Arlon, which is made of white wine and sweet-scented bedstraw. And which, by the way, should be consumed moderately.
"D'Musek geet muer den Owend an de Bësch fir de Meekranz ze maachen."
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: Don't break your watch
Expression which can either be used to tell somebody to ease the pressure, or to ironically tell somebody that they are not pulling their weight."Méchs du schonn nees Paus? Briech der d'Auer net!"
Expression which can either be used to tell somebody to ease the pressure, or to ironically tell somebody that they are not pulling their weight.
"Méchs du schonn nees Paus? Briech der d'Auer net!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Easter eggs
Widely known tradition in Europe and abroad. According to legend, the Easter Bunny hides the painted eggs (as well as presents) during the night in the garden, so that the children can search for them on Easter morning. Funny affair which demands some level of planning, if you don't want to find some too well hidden eggs at the end of the garden season. And no, the three 'e' are not a typo."Sot Kanner, waart dir schonn d'Ouschtereeër sichen?"
Widely known tradition in Europe and abroad. According to legend, the Easter Bunny hides the painted eggs (as well as presents) during the night in the garden, so that the children can search for them on Easter morning. Funny affair which demands some level of planning, if you don't want to find some too well hidden eggs at the end of the garden season. And no, the three 'e' are not a typo.
"Sot Kanner, waart dir schonn d'Ouschtereeër sichen?"
Sproch vun der Woch
Closing time/End of workday (literally: eve before a holiday)
Used at the end of a long workday to indicate that it's time to head home. Can also be used as an expression of being fed up with something:"Elo ass awer Feierowend hei!"
Used at the end of a long workday to indicate that it's time to head home. Can also be used as an expression of being fed up with something:
"Elo ass awer Feierowend hei!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Being mischievous (literally: to have nothing good in your head)
Is said of somebody who has a reputation for being naughty."Deen huet keng Gutt an der Kopp, dee mécht nëmmen Dommheeten."
Is said of somebody who has a reputation for being naughty.
"Deen huet keng Gutt an der Kopp, dee mécht nëmmen Dommheeten."
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: When the mice have eaten well, the flour is bitter
Used to indicate that a person fails to appreciate something because he or she lives in abundance.
Used to indicate that a person fails to appreciate something because he or she lives in abundance.
Sproch vun der Woch
To chat
Art of turning a spontaneous meeting into a pleasant exchange of information. The word is also being used to describe the sound of chimney fire."Am Uewe potert d'Feier, de Wanter jot ëm d'Haus ..."(Luxembourgish song)
Art of turning a spontaneous meeting into a pleasant exchange of information. The word is also being used to describe the sound of chimney fire.
"Am Uewe potert d'Feier, de Wanter jot ëm d'Haus ..."(Luxembourgish song)
Sproch vun der Woch
Beauty knows no pain (literally: pride suffers violence)
This expression confirms: the quest for beauty comes at a price."Dee brauch eng Stonn moies fir sech fäerdeg ze maachen. Tjo, Houfert leit Gewalt!"
This expression confirms: the quest for beauty comes at a price.
"Dee brauch eng Stonn moies fir sech fäerdeg ze maachen. Tjo, Houfert leit Gewalt!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Happy Holidays!
The editorial team of the portal Luxembourg.lu wishes you a merry Christmas and happy holidays!"Schéi Feierdeeg an e gudde Rutsch!"
The editorial team of the portal Luxembourg.lu wishes you a merry Christmas and happy holidays!
"Schéi Feierdeeg an e gudde Rutsch!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Pastry (literally: coffee biscuit)
Sweet bakery product which is popular at Luxembourg'sKaffisdëscher(i.e. breakfast tables). You might also come across this being calledMëtsch. Also very much appreciated by colleagues at the office."Wëlls de e Kaffiskichelchen?"
Sweet bakery product which is popular at Luxembourg'sKaffisdëscher(i.e. breakfast tables). You might also come across this being calledMëtsch. Also very much appreciated by colleagues at the office.
"Wëlls de e Kaffiskichelchen?"
Sproch vun der Woch
I love you - the most beautiful way to declare your feelings
When did you last say this to your loved one? Say it in Luxembourgish or add it to your SMS: the abbraviation EHDG is well-known in Luxembourg."Ech soen dir dat vill ze sielen: ech hunn dech gär."
When did you last say this to your loved one? Say it in Luxembourgish or add it to your SMS: the abbraviation EHDG is well-known in Luxembourg.
"Ech soen dir dat vill ze sielen: ech hunn dech gär."
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: To have been hit by a peel
A peel, used to slide bread into an oven, is a remarkable tool, especially when someone hits you with one, e.g. over the head. This in turn might then explain some goofy decisionmaking or downright nonsense someone has made - according to this Luxembourgish expression."Deen huet eng mat der Broutschéiss - deen deet am Schnéi Sandalen un."
A peel, used to slide bread into an oven, is a remarkable tool, especially when someone hits you with one, e.g. over the head. This in turn might then explain some goofy decisionmaking or downright nonsense someone has made - according to this Luxembourgish expression.
"Deen huet eng mat der Broutschéiss - deen deet am Schnéi Sandalen un."
Sproch vun der Woch
Hedgehog
Small animal which can often be found in gardens.
Small animal which can often be found in gardens.
Sproch vun der Woch
Door handle and measure for a glass of Luxembourg beer
Can be ordered at a locksmith or in a cafe. In the former case it opens doors, in the latter it quells thirst with half a litre of beer (roughly a pint). The name is derived from the fact that traditionalKlensch-glasses has a tin cap which had to be opened before drinking. Today, aHumpenis more commonly ordered. It you want to order one, always use the word in conjunction withWann ech gelift(Please):"Eng Klensch wann ech gelift! A fir mäi Kolleg och eng."
Can be ordered at a locksmith or in a cafe. In the former case it opens doors, in the latter it quells thirst with half a litre of beer (roughly a pint). The name is derived from the fact that traditionalKlensch-glasses has a tin cap which had to be opened before drinking. Today, aHumpenis more commonly ordered. It you want to order one, always use the word in conjunction withWann ech gelift(Please):
"Eng Klensch wann ech gelift! A fir mäi Kolleg och eng."
Sproch vun der Woch
An insufficient quantity
Literally: Something for the hollow tooth. Expression used if something is not present in sufficient quantity to have an impact (i.e. money, food, etc.). Also used in a figurative sense, e.g. in case of insufficient effort to achieve something."Dovu ginn ech net sat, dat war eppes fir den huelen Zant."
Literally: Something for the hollow tooth. Expression used if something is not present in sufficient quantity to have an impact (i.e. money, food, etc.). Also used in a figurative sense, e.g. in case of insufficient effort to achieve something.
"Dovu ginn ech net sat, dat war eppes fir den huelen Zant."
Sproch vun der Woch
Weak, poorly, mediocre
Word to express your dissatisfaction with a person, a situation or a performance. Can also be used if you're feeling poorly."Hatt fillt sech schappeg haut."
Word to express your dissatisfaction with a person, a situation or a performance. Can also be used if you're feeling poorly.
"Hatt fillt sech schappeg haut."
Sproch vun der Woch
What's up?
An expression which you almost certainly will have heard if you have Luxembourgish friends or colleagues. It is used to kick off a conversation, to change the topic, or simply to say 'Hello!'"A soss, wéi geet et?"
An expression which you almost certainly will have heard if you have Luxembourgish friends or colleagues. It is used to kick off a conversation, to change the topic, or simply to say 'Hello!'
"A soss, wéi geet et?"
Sproch vun der Woch
To criticise or complain
Activity that consists of criticising what one could not do better oneself. Preferably used for people (Kregéilerthen) who warm up quickly and start to grumble."Lauschter deem Kregéiler einfach net no."
Activity that consists of criticising what one could not do better oneself. Preferably used for people (Kregéilerthen) who warm up quickly and start to grumble.
"Lauschter deem Kregéiler einfach net no."
Sproch vun der Woch
To put your oar in / to put in your penny's worth
Literally: to add your grain of pepper. Oars, pennies or pepper? This expression is used in Luxembourgish to designate somebody's unsolicited participation in a discussion."Also, wann ech mäi Pefferkär emol kéint dobäi leeën, ..."
Literally: to add your grain of pepper. Oars, pennies or pepper? This expression is used in Luxembourgish to designate somebody's unsolicited participation in a discussion.
"Also, wann ech mäi Pefferkär emol kéint dobäi leeën, ..."
Sproch vun der Woch
Person who is dressed up for Carnival
During the Carnival period, from 2 February until Ash Wednesday, you'll be able to see quite a lot of them. Dressed up for the occasion, their natural habitat will be in or around the numerous festival halls in the countryside where masked balls take place, or on one of thelarge parades which take place each year.
During the Carnival period, from 2 February until Ash Wednesday, you'll be able to see quite a lot of them. Dressed up for the occasion, their natural habitat will be in or around the numerous festival halls in the countryside where masked balls take place, or on one of thelarge parades which take place each year.
Sproch vun der Woch
'I love you' - the most beautiful declaration of love
When did you last tell someone you loved them? This is the best way to express your feelings. In SMS, this expression is usually abbreviated EHDG. You can also use DK for 'Décke Kuss' (big kiss).
When did you last tell someone you loved them? This is the best way to express your feelings. In SMS, this expression is usually abbreviated EHDG. You can also use DK for 'Décke Kuss' (big kiss).
Sproch vun der Woch
Traditional Luxembourgish evening get-together
In the past, as the nights became longer and colder, the neighbourhood would meet at someone's place in the evening, in order to sing songs, tell stories, do some knitting or eat a bite together. That way the community spirit was strenghthened, and candles and firewood were being saved."Kënns de den Owend op eis Uucht?"
In the past, as the nights became longer and colder, the neighbourhood would meet at someone's place in the evening, in order to sing songs, tell stories, do some knitting or eat a bite together. That way the community spirit was strenghthened, and candles and firewood were being saved.
"Kënns de den Owend op eis Uucht?"
Sproch vun der Woch
Cool! (literally: thick gas)
Here's an expression you certainly won't find outside Luxembourg's borders. Even though it is in direct competition with the universally-used 'cool', 'Décke Gas' remains an expression you will (hopefully) hear regularly."Ass denëffentlechen Transport elo gratis? Décke Gas!"
Here's an expression you certainly won't find outside Luxembourg's borders. Even though it is in direct competition with the universally-used 'cool', 'Décke Gas' remains an expression you will (hopefully) hear regularly.
"Ass denëffentlechen Transport elo gratis? Décke Gas!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Inhabitant of Luxembourg's southern region, the 'Minett'
Luxembourg's South, rich with iron ore, was the country's centre for steel production until some time ago. The steelmill workers and inhabitants of that part of the country were thus called 'Minettsdapp'. Even though this was a derogatory term at first, it came to be adopted by the people from that region and is today born with pride."Minettsdäpp sivun der Long op d'Zong."
Luxembourg's South, rich with iron ore, was the country's centre for steel production until some time ago. The steelmill workers and inhabitants of that part of the country were thus called 'Minettsdapp'. Even though this was a derogatory term at first, it came to be adopted by the people from that region and is today born with pride.
"Minettsdäpp sivun der Long op d'Zong."
Sproch vun der Woch
This does not bother me in the slightest
Expression used to indicate that you are not impacted by something or simply do not care."Dat do pickt mech kee Meter!"
Expression used to indicate that you are not impacted by something or simply do not care.
"Dat do pickt mech kee Meter!"
Sproch vun der Woch
To wear one's heart on one's sleeve (literally: from the lung to the tongue)
Human property which consists in speaking one's mind freely, without letting other opinions interfere too much."Hatt ass vun der Long op d'Zong."
Human property which consists in speaking one's mind freely, without letting other opinions interfere too much.
"Hatt ass vun der Long op d'Zong."
Sproch vun der Woch
Common chaffinch
Small bird of around 14 to 18 cm length, very widespread in Europe. As a migratory bird, it returns from warmer regions towards the end of March, and is recognisable due to its singular song. In his poem 'D'Margréitchen' (The Daisy) Luxembourg poet Michel Lentz gives the chaffinch the role of proclaimer of spring.Héiers de de Poufank? Et gëtt Fréijoer.
Small bird of around 14 to 18 cm length, very widespread in Europe. As a migratory bird, it returns from warmer regions towards the end of March, and is recognisable due to its singular song. In his poem 'D'Margréitchen' (The Daisy) Luxembourg poet Michel Lentz gives the chaffinch the role of proclaimer of spring.
Héiers de de Poufank? Et gëtt Fréijoer.
Sproch vun der Woch
Thanks, bye
An expression you will certainly find useful in your daily life.Äddi a merci!
An expression you will certainly find useful in your daily life.
Äddi a merci!
Sproch vun der Woch
Easter Bunny
According to legend, this rabbit hides painted eggs on Easter morning, so that the children can go and find them. The hare also symbolises fertility, renewal and spring. Curious? Then discover moreLuxembourgish traditions surrounding Easter.Den Ouschterhues kënnt geschwënn d'Eeër verstoppen.
According to legend, this rabbit hides painted eggs on Easter morning, so that the children can go and find them. The hare also symbolises fertility, renewal and spring. Curious? Then discover moreLuxembourgish traditions surrounding Easter.
Den Ouschterhues kënnt geschwënn d'Eeër verstoppen.
Sproch vun der Woch
Stop talking rubbish
Literally: don't talk curd. The curd is the physical state of milk after coagulation, one step in the production of cheese. In this Luxembourgish expression it is synonymous to meaningless talk.Dat kann dach net stëmmen. Schwätz kee Brach!
Literally: don't talk curd. The curd is the physical state of milk after coagulation, one step in the production of cheese. In this Luxembourgish expression it is synonymous to meaningless talk.
Dat kann dach net stëmmen. Schwätz kee Brach!
Sproch vun der Woch
Till the cows come home
Literally: Liquorice Day. If somebody tells you to wait tillMokuchsdag, you can safely assume that it's never going to happen.Do kanns de bis Mokuchsdag waarden.
Literally: Liquorice Day. If somebody tells you to wait tillMokuchsdag, you can safely assume that it's never going to happen.
Do kanns de bis Mokuchsdag waarden.
Sproch vun der Woch
To have a chat
Pastime which consists in exchanging information about a multitude of topics informally and in a relaxed manner.Mir haten eis laang net gesinn an hunn dunn emol eng Kosettchen gehalen.
Pastime which consists in exchanging information about a multitude of topics informally and in a relaxed manner.
Mir haten eis laang net gesinn an hunn dunn emol eng Kosettchen gehalen.
Sproch vun der Woch
Though the years may pass, stupidity remains
Used to express your despair over a person who continually repeats the same mistakes or exhibits the same irritating character traits, usually over a lengthy amount of time.Dee léiert och näischt bäi. Tjo, d'Joere ginn, den Eefalt bleift.
Used to express your despair over a person who continually repeats the same mistakes or exhibits the same irritating character traits, usually over a lengthy amount of time.
Dee léiert och näischt bäi. Tjo, d'Joere ginn, den Eefalt bleift.
Sproch vun der Woch
He's arguing like a lawyer
Can be said of someone who can argue pretty well, even though he or she might not always be on the side of the truth.Gleef ëm net ëmmer alles, deen deedegt wéi en Affekot.
Can be said of someone who can argue pretty well, even though he or she might not always be on the side of the truth.
Gleef ëm net ëmmer alles, deen deedegt wéi en Affekot.
Sproch vun der Woch
Don't be such a miser
TheKuuschtis the crust of a bread - if someone iskuuschteg, he or she is a miser.Hatt ass nach ze kuuschteg fir sech sat z'iessen.
TheKuuschtis the crust of a bread - if someone iskuuschteg, he or she is a miser.
Hatt ass nach ze kuuschteg fir sech sat z'iessen.
Sproch vun der Woch
Hopping (or Dancing) Procession
On every Pentacost Tuesday, this procession, part of Unesoc's list of Intangible Cultural Heritage, advances through the abbey-town of Echternach, accompanied by the sounds of marching bands. A must for every visitor!Bass de en Dënschdeg och nees op der Sprangprëssessioun?
On every Pentacost Tuesday, this procession, part of Unesoc's list of Intangible Cultural Heritage, advances through the abbey-town of Echternach, accompanied by the sounds of marching bands. A must for every visitor!
Bass de en Dënschdeg och nees op der Sprangprëssessioun?
Sproch vun der Woch
Not to be taken for a ride
Literally: not to have been picked off a hedge. Fitting answer when you are not to be taken for a ride by someone.Ziel mir kee Blödsinn, ech si jo awer net vun der Heck gepléckt.
Literally: not to have been picked off a hedge. Fitting answer when you are not to be taken for a ride by someone.
Ziel mir kee Blödsinn, ech si jo awer net vun der Heck gepléckt.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: the Stay-at-home-cart
When you're travelling by stay-at-home-cart, you prefer to stay at home during the holidays, which by all means includes exploration ofof your own regionto discover some touristic gems. At least you won't have to plan long journeys or lose time in queues at the airport or traffic jams on the motorways- Fuert dir an d'Vakanz?- Mir fueren dëst Joer mat der Heibleifskäerchen.
When you're travelling by stay-at-home-cart, you prefer to stay at home during the holidays, which by all means includes exploration ofof your own regionto discover some touristic gems. At least you won't have to plan long journeys or lose time in queues at the airport or traffic jams on the motorways
- Fuert dir an d'Vakanz?
- Mir fueren dëst Joer mat der Heibleifskäerchen.
Sproch vun der Woch
To go berserk (literally: to jump out of the box)
Etwas ärgert Sie dermaßen, dass Sie aus der Haut fahren könnten? In dem Fall springen Luxemburger aus der Kiste.Wann dee sech net packt, da sprangen ech geschwënn aus der Këscht.
Etwas ärgert Sie dermaßen, dass Sie aus der Haut fahren könnten? In dem Fall springen Luxemburger aus der Kiste.
Wann dee sech net packt, da sprangen ech geschwënn aus der Këscht.
Sproch vun der Woch
Construction/roadwork site
You'll find them on Luxembourg's roads in many forms. Small or big, mobile or lasting for months, or even years, they are important for trafic management and shape how we move tomorrow. Luxembourg word which has been taken over from the French wordChantier. The plural form isSchantercher.T'ass ewell ee Schantjen um aneren hei.
You'll find them on Luxembourg's roads in many forms. Small or big, mobile or lasting for months, or even years, they are important for trafic management and shape how we move tomorrow. Luxembourg word which has been taken over from the French wordChantier. The plural form isSchantercher.
T'ass ewell ee Schantjen um aneren hei.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: My legs are made of aspic!
'Jelli' is a local product, but not used here in the sense of a culinary specialty. Instead an expression used to describe the feeling in one's legs after a long biking tour, for example through theLuxembourg Ardennes.De ganzen Dag um Vëlo - wat hunn ech d'Been am Jelli!
'Jelli' is a local product, but not used here in the sense of a culinary specialty. Instead an expression used to describe the feeling in one's legs after a long biking tour, for example through theLuxembourg Ardennes.
De ganzen Dag um Vëlo - wat hunn ech d'Been am Jelli!
Sproch vun der Woch
A hopeless case (literally: a bird for the cat)
Expression being normally used for someone who is impervious to any kind of advice.Looss e sinn, dat ass e Vull fir d'Kaz.
Expression being normally used for someone who is impervious to any kind of advice.
Looss e sinn, dat ass e Vull fir d'Kaz.
Sproch vun der Woch
Switching from one topic to the next
Having to listen to someone speak while constantly switching topics can be taxing one's patience indeed. The Luxembourgish expression is composed from the words 'Hëppches', meaning 'hopscotch', and 'Haapches' meaning 'everybody'.Wann hatt schwätzt, da kënnt et vun Hëppches op Haapches.
Having to listen to someone speak while constantly switching topics can be taxing one's patience indeed. The Luxembourgish expression is composed from the words 'Hëppches', meaning 'hopscotch', and 'Haapches' meaning 'everybody'.
Wann hatt schwätzt, da kënnt et vun Hëppches op Haapches.
Sproch vun der Woch
Pull the other one! (literally: the plums too!)
Fitting answer for when you don't quite believe a person.Jo, Quetschen och!
Fitting answer for when you don't quite believe a person.
Jo, Quetschen och!
Sproch vun der Woch
He'll be presented the bill
Literally: He'll now how much a pound of cherries costs. Expression to say that someone is going to have to face the consequences of his actions sooner or later.Wann en net oppasst, da gëtt e geschwë gewuer wat d'Pond Kiischte kascht.
Literally: He'll now how much a pound of cherries costs. Expression to say that someone is going to have to face the consequences of his actions sooner or later.
Wann en net oppasst, da gëtt e geschwë gewuer wat d'Pond Kiischte kascht.
Sproch vun der Woch
Merlan cuit dans la levure de bière
One of the culinary specialties served at theSchueberfouer. Usually accompanied by chips, salad and a good glass of white Moselle wine.Geess de de Mëtteg mat eppes op d'Fouer iessen? Ech hätt Losch op e gudde Fouerfësch.
One of the culinary specialties served at theSchueberfouer. Usually accompanied by chips, salad and a good glass of white Moselle wine.
Geess de de Mëtteg mat eppes op d'Fouer iessen? Ech hätt Losch op e gudde Fouerfësch.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: when dirt becomes manure, it wants to be chauffeured
Sometimes, a person accedes to wealth and then start being arrogant. A long time ago, a large heap of manure in front of a farm was judged to be a sign of wealth. To accede to wealth, i.e. a heap of manure, from humble beginnings (dirt) and then act arrogantly was judged to be very ill-mannered.- Hues de gesinn, wéi dee sech opféiert op senger neier Plaz?- Tjo, wann den Dreck Mëscht gëtt, da wier e gär gefouert.
Sometimes, a person accedes to wealth and then start being arrogant. A long time ago, a large heap of manure in front of a farm was judged to be a sign of wealth. To accede to wealth, i.e. a heap of manure, from humble beginnings (dirt) and then act arrogantly was judged to be very ill-mannered.
- Hues de gesinn, wéi dee sech opféiert op senger neier Plaz?
- Tjo, wann den Dreck Mëscht gëtt, da wier e gär gefouert.
Sproch vun der Woch
Cosy
Now that autumn has finally arrived, it is sometimes nice to just stay at home, make yourself comfortable and spend a 'schuckeleg' evening.Maache mir eis e schuckelegen Owend?
Now that autumn has finally arrived, it is sometimes nice to just stay at home, make yourself comfortable and spend a 'schuckeleg' evening.
Maache mir eis e schuckelegen Owend?
Sproch vun der Woch
He/she isn't the sharpest tool in the shed
Literally: He/she's not the sharpest kitchen knife in the drawer. The 'Knäip' is a short kitchen knife which finds use in many areas in the kitchen.T'ass net de schäerfste Knäip am Tirang.
Literally: He/she's not the sharpest kitchen knife in the drawer. The 'Knäip' is a short kitchen knife which finds use in many areas in the kitchen.
T'ass net de schäerfste Knäip am Tirang.
Sproch vun der Woch
Figure from Luxembourgish mythology
According to legend, this water spirit lived in the Attert, a river in the west of Luxembourg. With a Harpoon, he would catch children who had come too close to the Attert or a well, and drag them into his world. Today, theKropemannsfestin Redange/Attert takes place in his honour.Géi net ze no bei d'Waasser, soss hëlt dech de Kropemann.
According to legend, this water spirit lived in the Attert, a river in the west of Luxembourg. With a Harpoon, he would catch children who had come too close to the Attert or a well, and drag them into his world. Today, theKropemannsfestin Redange/Attert takes place in his honour.
Géi net ze no bei d'Waasser, soss hëlt dech de Kropemann.
Sproch vun der Woch
Cutting your coat to suit your cloth
Literally: You have to dance with the girls who are there. A long time ago, when rural communities were more isolated, the choice of potential partners was often very limited. At the village dance, boys had to choose from among the girls who had come. Even though the expression has long lost its original meaning, it is still being used in the Luxembourgish language in situations when your options are very limited.
Literally: You have to dance with the girls who are there. A long time ago, when rural communities were more isolated, the choice of potential partners was often very limited. At the village dance, boys had to choose from among the girls who had come. Even though the expression has long lost its original meaning, it is still being used in the Luxembourgish language in situations when your options are very limited.
Sproch vun der Woch
Breakfast bale (literally: coffee table)
Coffee has left its marks in Luxembourg: the day usually starts at theKaffisdëschwith, of course, a steaming hot cup of coffee. And for the amateurs of sweets, aKaffiskichelchenmight be added, a viennoiserie. And more than Luxembourger then can be spotted dipping their viennoiserie into their coffee before savouring it.
Coffee has left its marks in Luxembourg: the day usually starts at theKaffisdëschwith, of course, a steaming hot cup of coffee. And for the amateurs of sweets, aKaffiskichelchenmight be added, a viennoiserie. And more than Luxembourger then can be spotted dipping their viennoiserie into their coffee before savouring it.
Sproch vun der Woch
Keep calm (literally: leave the church in the village)
In Luxembourg, every village has its church - telling someone to leave it there is synonymous to asking someone not to exaggerate.
In Luxembourg, every village has its church - telling someone to leave it there is synonymous to asking someone not to exaggerate.
Sproch vun der Woch
You can't change people (literally: send a dunce into the forest, he'll return a fool)
Luxembourgish expression to show your despair at a person's inability to learn and avoid mistakes.
Luxembourgish expression to show your despair at a person's inability to learn and avoid mistakes.
Sproch vun der Woch
To leave the field (literally: to clear out the leaf)
Whether someone resigns from his post or leaves a place, in Luxembourg it is said that the person 'clears out the leaf'.
Whether someone resigns from his post or leaves a place, in Luxembourg it is said that the person 'clears out the leaf'.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: Hearsay is half a lie
Don't fall prey to urban legends! When confronted with an improbable story based on rumours, clearly state your disbelief with this Luxembourgish expression.
Don't fall prey to urban legends! When confronted with an improbable story based on rumours, clearly state your disbelief with this Luxembourgish expression.
Sproch vun der Woch
Why the long face? (literally: Are your carrying rain?)
Luxembourgish expression to ask someone why he or she is looking sad.
Luxembourgish expression to ask someone why he or she is looking sad.
Sproch vun der Woch
The common flu!
Vreckechtstems from the verbvrecken(eng.: to pass the bucket) and describes a state of health in which some people do feel like they are about to die. This includes a runny nose, headache, throat-ache and aching muscles and articulations, as well as respiratory difficulties and fever. In other words: the seasonal flu.
Vreckechtstems from the verbvrecken(eng.: to pass the bucket) and describes a state of health in which some people do feel like they are about to die. This includes a runny nose, headache, throat-ache and aching muscles and articulations, as well as respiratory difficulties and fever. In other words: the seasonal flu.
Sproch vun der Woch
Boxemännchen
Sorry, but there is no counterpart in the English-speaking world that we know of - unless there is, then please let us know.TheBoxemännchenis a brioche formed like a small man which is on sale in the weeks running up toSaint Nicholas(on 6 December). Children love it with their breakfast or afternoon tea, but it is equally popular in Luxembourg's offices or among friends.
Sorry, but there is no counterpart in the English-speaking world that we know of - unless there is, then please let us know.
TheBoxemännchenis a brioche formed like a small man which is on sale in the weeks running up toSaint Nicholas(on 6 December). Children love it with their breakfast or afternoon tea, but it is equally popular in Luxembourg's offices or among friends.
Sproch vun der Woch
Grand Duke's birthday
A long time ago, the celebrations were held on the day of the Grand Duke's birthday. In 1961, the datewas fixed on 23 June, and has remained thus ever since.
A long time ago, the celebrations were held on the day of the Grand Duke's birthday. In 1961, the datewas fixed on 23 June, and has remained thus ever since.
Sproch vun der Woch
The craving (literally: the steep hunger)
It doesn't matter what the time is and the stomach is growling - it's time to see what treasures the fridge holds.
It doesn't matter what the time is and the stomach is growling - it's time to see what treasures the fridge holds.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: The wild one runs in the forest
This expression is not really translatable into English - it is a common phrase used by parents all over Luxembourg when their offspring use the phrase "I want" for the umpteenth time in a row. Basically, a wordplay on the Luxembourgish wordswëllen(to want) andWëllen(the wild one).
This expression is not really translatable into English - it is a common phrase used by parents all over Luxembourg when their offspring use the phrase "I want" for the umpteenth time in a row. Basically, a wordplay on the Luxembourgish wordswëllen(to want) andWëllen(the wild one).
Sproch vun der Woch
To stand up to somebody
This expression shows your appreciation that a person stands up to somebody.
This expression shows your appreciation that a person stands up to somebody.
Sproch vun der Woch
Saint Nicholas
Kleeschenis the Luxembourgish name for Saint Nicolas, a nice man who is often dressed in red, bears a bishops' hat and a crosier. He is assisted by theHouseker, who punishes children who have been naughty by handing them a twig.Saint Nicholas Day is celebrated on 6 December, and for the occasion all of Luxembourg's fundamental schools remain closed.
Kleeschenis the Luxembourgish name for Saint Nicolas, a nice man who is often dressed in red, bears a bishops' hat and a crosier. He is assisted by theHouseker, who punishes children who have been naughty by handing them a twig.Saint Nicholas Day is celebrated on 6 December, and for the occasion all of Luxembourg's fundamental schools remain closed.
Last update12.11.2020
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/ap-fetes-traditions.html
About... Festivals and Traditions in Luxembourg
The brochure provides a chronological overview of the festivals and traditions in Luxembourg and describes customs such as "Dräikinneksdag", "Bretzelsonndeg" or "Trauliicht-Brennen" as well as traditions that are firmly anchored in cultural life such as the "Oktav" and the "Schueberfouer". The author also presents some customs and traditions from other cultures that have recently found their way into Luxembourg.
Other languages
A propos... des fêtes et traditions au Luxembourg
La publication fournit un aperçu chronologique du calendrier festif du Grand-Duché, passant ainsi en revue des traditions telles que Dräikinneksdag, Bretzelsonndeg ou d’Trauliicht brennen, sans oublier des événements incontournables tels que l’Oktav et la Schueberfouer. L’auteur présente également quelques us et coutumes issus de cultures étrangères qui, venus s’ajouter aux traditions autochtones, ont enrichi notre paysage festivo-folklorique.
Apropos ... Feste und Traditionen in Luxemburg
Die Broschüre gibt einen chronologischen Überblick über die Feste und Traditionen in Luxemburg und beschreibt Bräuche wie "Dräikinneksdag", "Bretzelsonndeg" oder "Trauliicht-Brennen" sowie die im kulturellen Leben fest verankerten Traditionen wie die "Oktav" und die "Schueberfouer". Der Autor stellt auch einige Bräuche und Traditionen aus anderen Kulturen vor, die rezent in Luxemburg Einzug gehalten haben.
Last update24.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/population.html
Population
Population
Sub-sections
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/societe-et-culture/a-table/maitrank.html
Maitrank
When the first rays of spring sunshine give the world a new splendour and bathe the woods in a delicate green, it is also time to savour a regional speciality: Maitrank. This woodruff-based alcoholic drink is very easy to make yourself and is a real pleasure.
TheMaitrank(literally: May drink) isan alcoholic beverage based on woodruff. It has itsorigins in the region around the Belgian city ofArlon, close to the Luxembourgish border, where festivals are organised to its honour. The Western part of Luxembourg also belongs to this region:Until 1839,Arlonwas part of the (Grand) Duchy of Luxembourg, as was the rest of the Belgian province of Luxembourg. That's why we don't miss the opportunity to present you this simple, yet pleasant recipe.
You just need to embark on the discovery of Luxembourg's woods. If you find woodruff, you will literally have the main ingredient in your pocket.
Ingredients:
Preparation:
Servechilled in a glass with a slice of orange. Alternatively, you can alsoadd some Crémant.
Maitrankcan be kept in the refrigerator for up to 3 weeks.
Last update02.05.2025
Culinary delights
Meekranz and Labour Day: celebrating Spring and workers
Flavours
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions/societe-culture-fetes-traditions-unesco-ecoles.html
Erreur404
Cette page n'existe pas
Veuillez vérifier l'adresse si vous l'avez saisie vous-même. Pour localiser l'information que vous cherchez, vous pouvez faire une recherche :
ou consultez nos articles les plus lus :
Société et culture
Découvrez la société luxembourgeoise avec toutes ses particularités. Ses fêtes et traditions, son histoire, sa culture riche, sa gastronomie et son engagement international.
Vivre
Famille
Education
Qualité de vie
Mobilité
S'installer
Santé et sécurité sociale
Sport
Visiter
Avec cinq régions touristiques, quatre parcs naturels et une offre culturelle multilingue, le Luxembourg offre aux visiteurs un jeu fascinant de contrastes: histoire et modernité, châteaux anciens et architecture contemporaine, lacs et forêts et une capitale cosmopolite au coeur de l’Europe.
Travailler et étudier
L'emploi au Luxembourg
Les études au Luxembourg
Investir
Situé au cœur de l’Europe, le Luxembourg est votre porte d’entrée idéale sur le marché européen. Le Grand-Duché et ses institutions vous proposent toute une gamme de mesures d’aides destinées à assurer un bon départ à votre entreprise..
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/international-openness.html
International openness
International openness
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/ap-europe.html
About... Luxembourg and the European Union
This brochure illustrates more than 170 years of economic and political integration of Luxembourg before presenting in detail its role in the European construction since the 1950s: founding member of the European Union, the issue of the seat, the European institutions in Luxembourg and the various presidencies of the Council of the European Union.
Other languages
A propos... du Luxembourg et de l’Union européenne
La brochure illustre plus de 170 ans d’intégration économique et politique du Luxembourg, avant de présenter en détail son rôle dans la construction européenne depuis les années 1950: membre fondateur de l’Union européenne, question du siège, institutions européennes installées à Luxembourg et présidences du Conseil de l’Union européenne.
Apropos ... Luxemburg und die Europäische Union
Die Broschüre illustriert über 170 Jahre wirtschaftlicher und politischer Integration Luxemburgs und geht anschließend ausführlich auf die Rolle des Landes im europäischen Aufbauwerk seit den 1950er Jahren ein: Gründungsmitglied der Europäischen Union, Sitzfrage, europäische Institutionen in Luxemburg und mehrfacher Vorsitz des Rates der Union.
Last update22.08.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/political-system.html
Monarchy and institutions
Monarchy and institutions
Last update02.10.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/employment-in-luxembourg.html
Employment in Luxembourg
Employment in Luxembourg
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/your-business-in-luxembourg.html
Your business in Luxembourg
Your business in Luxembourg
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/sustainable-development.html
Sustainable development
Sustainable development
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/territoire-et-climat.html
Territory and Climate
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/ap-litterature.html
About... Literature in Luxembourg
This publication presents the development and the current status of Luxembourg literature through its authors.
Other languages
A propos... de la littérature au Luxembourg
Cette publication présente l'évolution et l'état actuel de la littérature du Grand-Duché de Luxembourg à travers ses auteurs.
Apropos ... Literatur in Luxemburg
Diese Publikation stellt die Entwicklung und die jetzige Situation der Luxemburger Literatur mittels ihrer Autoren dar.
Last update24.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/culinary-delights.html
Culinary delights
Culinary delights
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/society-and-culture/festivals-and-traditions.html
Festival and traditions
Sub-sections
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visiter/les-regions/mullerthal.html
Mullerthal: fascinating geology and traditions
The Mullerthal region, known as Mëllerdall in Luxembourgish, lies in eastern Luxembourg. It is often referred to as Luxembourg's Little Switzerland. The region offers an enchanting blend of natural and cultural heritage and has two UNESCO labels: the hopping procession and theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall.Discover the Mullerthal's awe-inspiring geology and fairytale castles.
Mullerthal, UNESCO-labelled nature and traditions
The Mullerthal is famed for the diversity of its natural and geological heritage – it is home to astonishing rock formations and an outstanding biotope. This natural heritage can be explored in the Natur- & Geopark Mëllerdall nature park, part of the UNESCO Global Geoparks network.
Echternach, the region's capital and the country's oldest town, is home to one of the most popular traditions in Luxembourg: the hopping procession orSprangpressessioun, which is on UNESCO's Representative List of Intangible Cultural Heritage.
The region also has a wealth of historical sites and castles – it really is the perfect place for anyone looking for fascinating culture and good food.
Éislek & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to explore the Mullerthal
Exploring the natural environment
Hiking is the perfect wayto dive into the region's natural treasures, especially in theNatur- & Geopark Mëllerdall:
The Mullerthal Trail has been awarded the Leading Quality Trails – Best of Europe label by the European Hiking Federation.
You can alsoexplore the Mullerthal by bike:
Exploring the region's heritage
The town of Echternachhas long been a cultural crossroads. It is a great place for anyone interested in ancient history and traditions. Here is a selection of our favourite activities:
The region also hasseveral castles, including:
Last update28.01.2026
For more information
Éislek: adventure awaits
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/nature-and-discovery.html
Nature and discovery
Nature and discovery
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/gesellschaft-und-kultur/nachhaltige-entwicklung/energie-effizienz.html
Energie-Effizienz
Wärmepumpenheizung, Wanddämmung und Wärmeschutzverglasung sind allgemein bekannte Techniken zur Energieeinsparung. Aber die Energieleistung ist ein echter Katalysator für Innovationen und die Möglichkeiten zur Optimierung von Energiequellen sind vielfältiger. Wir informieren Sie über den Energieausweis (CPE) und das Paket "Klimabank an nohaltegt Wunnen" und stellen Ihnen den "Mamerhaff" vor, ein bemerkenswertes Beispiel im Bereich der energetischen Sanierung!
Energetische Renovierung: der "Mamerhaff" ein bemerkenswertes und preisgekröntes Beispiel
Das Projekt "Mamerhaff", ein Familienprojekt, steht für die Umwandlung des Bauernhofs der Großeltern in zweiWohnhäuserund einZentrum für alternative Medizin und Familientreffen. Die architektonische Neuinterpretation des Gebäudes geht Hand in Hand mit seiner funktionalen und energetischen Optimierung. Es wurde mit dem Sonderpreis "Vorbildliche energetische Sanierung" im Rahmen desBauhärepräisdes Verbands der Architekten und Beratenden Ingenieure (OAI) 2020 ausgezeichnet.
Mamerhaff
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Arnaud De Meyer und Christian Liewer, assoziierter Architekt und projektverantwortlicher Architekt im BüroSTEINMETZDEMEYER, waren für die Renovierung des "Mamerhaffs" verantwortlich. Die Eigenschaften ihrer Projekte sind immer ortsspezifisch und speziell auf die physische und kulturelle Umgebung des Ortes abgestimmt. Von Beginn des Planungsprozesses an steht dienachhaltige Entwicklung(Energie, Gesundheit, Bauqualität, Materialeinsparung und Umweltschutz)im Vordergrund.
Dasalte Wohnhauswurderestauriertund in ein Haus des 21. Jahrhundertsumgewandelt, wobei dieursprüngliche Struktur respektiertund das historische Zeugnis des Gebäudes bewahrt wurde. Die alte Scheune mit ihrem steinernen Bogen ist heute der Haupteingang zu den Arztpraxen. Das zweite Haus befindet sich auf der anderen Seite des alten Stallgebäudes.
Die Herausforderung bestand darin, denarchitektonischen Charaktereines der letzten gut erhaltenen Bauernhäuser im Zentrum des Dorfes zubewahrenund gleichzeitig die neuen Funktionen zu integrieren. Außerdem entsprach der Grundriss des bestehenden Gebäudes auf dem Grundstück nicht mehr den neuen Vorschriften der Gemeinde. Aber diesesWahrzeichen des Dorfes, voller persönlicher Erinnerungen, ist erhalten geblieben, einschließlich der umliegenden Bäume, die ebenfalls Teil des Erbes sind. Dieser nachhaltige Ansatz wurde durch denService des sites et monuments nationaux(Denkmalschutzbehörde) unterstützt.
Die Scheune und die Molkereiwurden von hinten entkernt und das Dachgebälk abgebaut. Anschließend wurden hinter der Fassadeneue Holzvolumengebaut, wobei die vorhandenen Öffnungen erhalten blieben. Das großeDachwurde mitMetalllamellenrekonstruiert, um Diskretion zu gewährleisten und eine Sonnenschutzfunktion zu bieten, die Überhitzung vermeidet und die Energieversorgung steuert.
"Die erste Eigenschaft von Nachhaltigkeit ist, dass sie anhält! Man muss sich immer überlegen, müssen wir wirklich abreißen oder können wir behalten, was wir haben? Es ist nachhaltiger, das Bestehende zu erhalten." Arnaud De Meyer
DieHolzkonstruktionenwurden mit Massivholz- und Holzfaserplatten gebaut, sowie mitZellulose- und Schafwolldämmung(vor allem für das Dach) isoliert. Sogar derAufzugsschacht, der die drei Etagen des Gemeinschaftsbereiches verbindet, ist aus Holz gefertigt! Holz, ein recycelbarer und nachwachsender Werkstoff, hat eine geringe "graue Energie", da es bei seiner Herstellung wenig Energie verbraucht und die Speicherung von CO2 ermöglicht.
Es gibt viele sichtbare Konstruktionselemente im Gebäude, was eineÖkonomie der Ausführungenaus finanzieller Sicht, aber auch ausökologischerundnachhaltiger Sichtimpliziert. Es wurden nur die notwendigen Materialien verbraucht.
Der Schuppen an der Rückseite des Hauses wurde durch eine neue Konstruktion ersetzt. Eine Garage, ein ein Multifunktionsraum und die gesamte Technikzentrale (Pelletheizung, Warmwasserbereitung,Lüftungsanlage, Schaltschränke usw.) befinden sich hier. Aufgrund der zu beachtenden Vorschriften in einer solchen gemischten Einheit wird die Holzkonstruktion aus Sicherheitsgründen (Brandschneisen etc.) durch massive Konstruktionen ergänzt.
DieIsolierungdes ehemaligen Hauptgebäudes wurdeinnenmit Kalksandsteinen vorgenommen, um das Aussehen und die Charakteristik des Gebäudes zu erhalten. Die ursprünglichen Kalksteine nehmen leicht Feuchtigkeit auf und sind sehr frostempfindlich, daher war eineQualitäts- und Quantitätsanalyse des Dämmmaterialsnotwendig. Diese Berechnung wurde von einemBauphysikerdurchgeführt.
Mamerhaff
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
Mamerhaff
© Bohumil Kostohryz, boshua s.à.r.l.
"Bei der Nachhaltigkeit geht es nicht nur um die alten Mauern, sondern auch um all die kleinen Details, in denen viel Emotion steckt. Alte Fliesen oder eine alte Tür, Dinge, die man um und im Haus recyceln kann." Christian Liewer
Auf dem Dach des Schuppens sindthermische und photovoltaische Sonnenkollektoreninstalliert. Die Flachdächer der Neubauten sindGründächermit einheimischen Honig-Pflanzen. Diese Dächer unterstützen nicht nur dieArtenvielfalt, sondern schaffen auch einePhasenverschiebung des Regenwassersund vermeiden so eine Sättigung des Abwassersystems.
Im ganzen Haus wurde eineFußbodenheizunginstalliert, die mit Niedrigtemperaturwasser und verbrauchsarmer Heiztechnik arbeitet.
"Aus der Ferne denkt man, der Hof hat sich nicht allzu sehr verändert. Aber aus der Nähe kann man sehen, dass es etwas Neues, etwas von heute ist. Wir sind stolz darauf, etwas Nachhaltiges gebaut zu haben, das ein Zusammenleben von Zeitgenössischem und Historischem ermöglicht." Arnaud De Meyer
Ein Qualitätslabel
​
DerEnergieausweis(Certificat de performance énergétique - CPE) definiertdie Gesamtenergieeffizienz eines Wohngebäudes. Die Einstufung in dieverschiedenen Energieeffizienzklassen, die von A (die beste Klasse) bis I (die schlechteste Klasse) reichen, basiert auf demIndex des Primärenergiebedarfs, des Heizbedarfs und der CO2-Emissionen.
Der Energiepass ist einegesetzliche Vorgabe. Er wird vonArchitekten oder beratenden Ingenieurenerstellt, die Mitglieder desOrdens der Architekten und beratenden Ingenieure(OAI) und vom Minister für Energie und Raumentwicklungzugelassene Expertensind. Er ist für 10 Jahre gültig.
Für dieSanierungeines Gebäudes mit besonderem Aufwand im Bereich der Energieeffizienz stehen verschiedeneZuschüsse und Subventionenzur Verfügung. Passivhaus, Niedrigenergie- oder Plusenergiehaus, seit dem 1. Januar 2017 mussjeder Neubaueines Hauses in Luxemburg einem Gebäude mit nahezu Null-Energieverbrauch entsprechen.
"Das Gebäude von morgen"
Im Jahr 2016 hat die luxemburgische Regierung erstmals das Paket "Klimabank an nohaltegt Wunnen" (Klimabank und nachhaltiges Wohnen) vorgestellt. Dieses Projekt fördertnachhaltiges Bauen, diedauerhafte energetische Sanierung von Wohngebäudenund denEinsatz von erneuerbaren Energienim Wohnungsbau.
Dank diesesProgrammskönnen Siedie Vorteile desKlimaPrêtnutzen, um die energetische und nachhaltige Renovierung Ihres Hauses zu finanzieren. Das Paket beinhaltet auch dasNachhaltigkeits-Zertifizierungssystem für neue Wohnungen(LENOZ- "Lëtzebuerger Nohaltegkeets-Zertifikat fir Wunngebaier"). Diese Zertifizierung ist einganzheitlicher Ansatz zur Nachhaltigkeitsbewertung. Sie istoptional, aber mitfinanzieller Unterstützung verbunden.
Es wurdeeine zentrale Anlaufstellefüralle wohnungsbezogenen Hilfengeschaffen. Die Websitewww.logement.luenthält alle relevanten Informationen zu diesem Thema.
Derintegrierte nationale Energie- und Klimaplan(PNEC) bildetdie Grundlage der luxemburgischen Klima- und Energiepolitik. Er beschreibt die Maßnahmen, die ergriffen wurden, um die nationalen Ziele für dieReduzierung der Treibhausgasemissionen, erneuerbare Energien und Energieeffizienzbis zum Jahr 2030 zu erreichen. Da die Verbesserung der Energieeffizienz von Gebäuden dem Klima zugute kommt, enthält der Plan auchneue Bestimmungen für Funktionsgebäude.
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am14.08.2025
Mehr wissen
MOAI.lu
Luxemburgische Architektur - raffiniert und international renommiert
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/fr/societe-et-culture/developpement-durable/energies-renouvelables.html
Cap sur les énergies renouvelables
En progression constante, les énergies renouvelables ne cessent de gagner du terrain sur le chemin de la transition énergétique. Dans son plan de soutien au développement de l’énergie verte "Gréng relance fir Lëtzebuerg" le Luxembourg est en bonne voie pour atteindre ses objectifs.
Lesénergies renouvelablescontinuent à progresser dans l’Union européenne, laquelle s'est fixée pour objectif que la part des énergies vertes atteigne au moins32% de la consommation d'énergie d’ici 2030.
Face à cet objectif de taille, le Luxembourg renforce de manière considérable certaines mesures de sonPlan national en matière d'énergie et de climat (PNEC), qu'elle vient d’envoyer à la Commission européenne. Cette feuille de route décrit les politiques et les mesures permettant d’atteindre les objectifs nationaux en matière de réduction des émissions de gaz à effet de serre (-55%), d’énergies renouvelables (25%) et d’efficacité énergétique (de 40 à 44%) à l'horizon 2030.
CleverWunnen: Faire d'une pierre deux coups
Pour les périodes 2020-2021 et 2021-2030 le but est bien défini. À court terme, il s’agit d'une part de tendre la main auxentreprises artisanalesafin que celles-ci puissent reprendre pied après la crise sanitaire tout en renforçant lesprogrammes de soutien du secteur(Neistart Lëtzebuerg).
D'autre part, desaugmentations d'aides financièresdu paquet"Gréng Relance fir Lëtzebuerg – E Plus fir d’Klima, d'Handwierk an d'Bierger"ont pour but d'encourager la rénovation énergétique durable de logements. Ce programme"CleverWunnen"fait partie de la feuille de route officielle sur le chemin de la transition énergétique qui se traduit par une diminution nette de la consommation énergétique et une réduction drastique des émissions de CO2.
En pratique, cette transition se reflète par l'adoption de règlements, de programmes et de projets dans les domaines spécifiques entre 2020 et 2030. Mais, pour le particulier elle se manifeste surtout par des aides financières attrayantes pour la rénovation énergétique.
Les aides financières
Infos pratiques
Toutes les informations sur lesaides financièressont disponibles sur le site de laKlima-Agence. Les conseillers de laKlima-Agencesont aussi disponibles par hotline au 8002 11 90.
La demande d’aide financière se fait viawww.guichet.luet sera ensuite traité par l’Administration de l’environnement.
Il reste à noter que leprêt climatiqueà taux réduit et le prêt climatique à taux 0% sont toujours disponibles pour toute personne désirant faire une rénovation énergétique.
Dernière modification le11.04.2025
Pour en savoir plus
Pic historique de l’énergie solaire au Luxembourg
IBLA – l'institut à la recherche du biologique
L'économie circulaire luxembourgeoise
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/gesellschaft-und-kultur/nachhaltige-entwicklung/energies-renouvelables.html
Erneuerbare Energien im Fokus
Die erneuerbaren Energien wachsen immer weiter. Auf dem Weg zur Energiewende gewinnen sie zunehmend an Bedeutung. Mit seinem Plan zur Unterstützung der Entwicklung von grüner Energie "Gréng relance fir Lëtzebuerg" ist Luxemburg auf dem besten Weg, seine Ziele zu erreichen.
Erneuerbare Energienbefinden sich im Aufwind in der Europäischen Union, welche sich als Ziel gesetzt hat, bis 2030 einen Verbrauchsanteil von mindestens32% grüner Energien zu erreichen.
Angesichts dieses hochgesteckten Ziels verstärkt Luxemburg erheblich verschiedene Maßnahmen desNationalen Energie- und Klimaplans (PNEC), den es eben erst der Europäischen Kommission übermittelt hat. Diese Roadmap beschreibt die Strategien und Maßnahmen zur Erreichung der nationalen Ziele für die Reduzierung der Treibhausgasemissionen (-55%), erneuerbare Energien (25%) und Energieeffizienz (40-44%) bis 2030.
​
CleverWunnen: Zwei Fliegen mit einer Klappe schlagen
Für die Zeiträume 2020-2021 und 2021-2030 ist das Ziel klar definiert. Kurzfristig geht es einerseits darum, denHandwerksbetriebendie Hand zu reichen, damit sie nach der Gesundheitskrise wieder auf die Beine kommen, und gleichzeitig dieUnterstützungsprogramme für die Branchezu stärken (Neistart Lëtzebuerg).
Andererseits sollen dieAufstockungen der Finanzhilfenaus dem Paket"Gréng Relance fir Lëtzebuerg - E Plus fir d'Klima, d'Handwierk an d'Bierger"die nachhaltige energetische Sanierung von Wohnungen fördern. ​ Dieses"CleverWunnen"-Programm ist Teil der offiziellen Roadmap auf dem Weg zur Energiewende, die zu einer Senkung des Energieverbrauchs und einer drastischen Reduzierung der CO2-Emissionen führt.
In der Praxis spiegelt sich dieser Übergang in der Verabschiedung von Vorschriften, Programmen und Projekten in bestimmten Bereichen zwischen 2020 und 2030 wider. Für den Einzelnen manifestiert sie sich aber vor allem durch attraktive finanzielle Unterstützungen für die energetische Sanierung.
Finanzielle Unterstützung
Clever fuerenundClever lueden: Elektromobilität fördern
Im Rahmen des Programms "Gréng Relance fir Lëtzebuerg - E Plus fir d'Klima, d'Handwierk und d'Bierger" gibt es auchHilfsmittel im Bereich der Mobilität.​Diese sehen Kaufprämien für Fahrräder und Pedelecs sowie für Vierräder, Motorräder, Elektromopeds und Autos vor. Diese werden für alleKäufe bis zum Ende des ersten Quartals 2021verstärkt.
Von nun an werdenbis zu 600 €für den Kauf eines neuen Fahrrads (+ 100 %),bis zu 1.000 €für den Kauf eines neuen elektrischen Vierrads, Motorrads oder Mopeds (+ 100 %) sowieein pauschaler Bonus von 8.000 €(+ 60 %) für den Kauf eines neuen, zu 100 % elektrisch betriebenen Autos/Lastwagens gewährt. Bei"Plug-in"-Hybridfahrzeugen(≤ 50 g CO2/km) beträgt die gewährte Prämie immer 2.500 €. (Teilnahmeberechtigt sind Fahrzeuge, die bis zum Ende des 1. Quartals 2021 bestellt wurden).
Aber auch auf der Ebene der Aufladungsinfrastruktur werden die Anstrengungen verdoppelt. Neben dem Aufbau eines Netzes öffentlicher Ladestationen sollenBoni für das Aufladenzu Hausegeschaffen werden, um den Übergang zur Elektromobilität zu beschleunigen.
Praktische Informationen
Alle Informationen zu denFinanzhilfenfinden Sie auf derWebsite derKlima-Agence. Die Klima-Agence Berater sind auch über die Hotline 8002 11 90 erreichbar.
Der Antrag auf finanzielle Unterstützung wird überwww.guichet.lugestellt und dann von der Umweltbehörde bearbeitet.
Es gilt zu beachten, dass das zinsgünstigeKlimadarlehenund das 0%-Klimadarlehen weiterhin für alle Personen verfügbar sind, die eine energetische Renovierung durchführen möchten.
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am14.08.2025
Mehr wissen
Historischer Höhepunkt der Solarenergie in Luxemburg
IBLA – das Forschungszentrum für Bio
Die Kreislaufwirtschaft in Luxemburg
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/health-and-social-security.html
Health and social security
Health and social security
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/work-and-study/studying-in-luxembourg.html
Studying in Luxembourg
Studying in Luxembourg
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/fr/vivre/education/enseignement-musique-luxembourg.html
L'enseignement musical au Luxembourg: un parcours pour tous les âges
Au Luxembourg, l'enseignement musical débute dès l'âge de quatre ans. Il est proposé par les écoles de musique et conservatoires communaux, en dehors du cadre scolaire obligatoire. De nombreuses communes offrent également des cours pour adultes. L'Université du Luxembourg, quant à elle, forme les futurs enseignants. Depuis la rentrée 2022/2023, une grande partie des cours de musique, de danse et des arts de la parole sont gratuits dans les établissements d'enseignement musical du secteur communal. Voici un aperçu de l'organisation de ce parcours musical au Grand-Duché.
Le parcours de l'enseignement musical
L'éveil musical
Dès l'âge de quatre ans, les enfants sont invités à découvrir la musique à travers le chant, le mouvement et le jeu. Cette phase d'éveil vise à cultiver le goût et la joie de s'exprimer par la musique. Les enfants apprennent à chanter, à bouger et à danser en musique, tout en découvrant l'écoute musicale et les instruments de manière ludique. L'éveil musical constitue également une première étape vers l'apprentissage instrumental. Il contribue à l'épanouissement des aptitudes intellectuelles, manuelles et sociales des enfants, tout en favorisant la cohésion du groupe.
Cette première phase, d'une durée maximale de deux ans, est dispensée dans les conservatoires et les écoles de musique régionales et locales, organisées par les communes sous la tutelle duministère de l'Éducation nationale, de l'Enfance et de la Jeunesse.
La division inférieure
Après l'éveil, les enfants entament une formation musicale de base, qui accompagne les études instrumentales et vocales.Cette formation s’étalant sur quatre années d’études est obligatoire  pour entamer ou poursuivre les cours instrumentaux ou vocaux.
Les matières musicales étudiées dans la formation musicale de base  sont: le chant, la lecture de notes, les mesures, rythmes et pulsation, l'improvisation, l'écoute,  et la notation musicale.
La division moyenne et la division moyenne spécialisée
Les cours des divisions moyenne et moyenne spécialisée peuvent être dispensé dans les écoles de musiques régionales et dans les conservatoires. Il est à noter qu’une mission nationale est confiée aux trois conservatoires pour enseigner la division moyenne spécialisée.
La division supérieure
Les cours de la division supérieure sont exclusivement dispensés par les conservatoires.A l’instar de la mission nationale confiée aux conservatoires, celle-ci englobe également l’enseignement de la division supérieure.
Pour découvrir tous les établissements d’enseignement musical du pays, cliquezici.
Le Bachelor en Enseignement musical
L'Université du Luxembourg, en partenariat avec les trois conservatoires du Grand-Duché, propose des études supérieures aux étudiants passionnéspar la musique qui souhaitent enseigner: leBachelor en Enseignement musical.
Dans le cadre des études, les étudiants acquièrent les différentes méthodes d'enseignement, effectuent des stages chaque semestre et fréquentent une université à l'étranger. Un tuteur académique personnel accompagne chaque étudiant pendant toute la durée de la formation.
Saviez-vous?
Depuis la rentrée 2022/2023, la majorité des cours de musique, de danse et des arts de la parole sont gratuits dans les établissements communaux pour les jeunes jusqu'à 18 ans. Et pour les adultes ou les niveaux plus avancés, les frais sont plafonnés à 100 € par branche et par an. Les familles à revenu modeste peuvent même bénéficier d'un remboursement total ou partiel.
Les cours pour adultes
Les cours deformation musicale,instrumentale et vocale pour adultes, tout comme les cours de diction pour adultes ainsi que de danse jazz pour adultes s'adressent à tous les adulteset ont pour but général de développer le goût, le plaisir et l'intérêt pour la musique, les arts de la parole et la danse.
Les cours pour adultes peuvent être dispensés par les trois types d’établissement d’enseignement musical, à savoir les écoles de musique locales, les écoles de musique régionales et les conservatoires.
Dernière modification le06.11.2025
Pour en savoir plus
Enseignement fondamental: offrir les mêmes chances à chacun
Enseignement secondaire
Rock, Pop, et cetera - les musiques populaires
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/fr/vivre/education/enseignement-fondamental.html
Enseignement fondamental: offrir les mêmes chances à chacun
L'enseignement fondamental au Luxembourg regroupe les 9 premières années de scolarité (3 à 11 ans) divisées en 4 cycles d'apprentissage. La scolarisation est obligatoire à partir de 4 ans. Au Luxembourg, l'approche pédagogique est axée sur les compétences individuelles, une évaluation en socles et le travail en équipe des pédagogues.
Une offre scolaire publique diverse et accueillante
Le Luxembourg compte156 écoles fondamentales publiquesà travers le pays. Les écoles fondamentales sont organisées par les communes et l'État. La direction des écoles est structurée en quinze régions suivant une répartition selon le nombre d'élèves, d’enseignants et d'écoles.Ladiversité de la sociétéa pour effet que la population scolaire est elle aussipolyglotte et multiculturelle.
Trois écoles publiques fondamentales (Eis Schoul;Jean-JaurèsetVilla Mirabella) proposent des approches pédagogiques alternatives. De plus, nous avons quatreécoles publiques internationalesfonctionnant selon le système des écoles européennes qui facilitent l'accueil scolaire desenfants d'expatriés et étrangers.
Gratuité des structures d'accueil et des repas scolaires
L'enseignement luxembourgeois vise à offrir des chances égales à tous les élèves pour qu'ils puissent réaliser leur potentiel. Dans cet esprit,l'accueil dans les structures d'éducation non formelleest ainsi rendu gratuit pendant les semaines d'école. La gratuité concerne les maisons relais, les foyers scolaires et les assistants parentaux.
En plus, les repas scolaires de qualité sont gratuits pour tous les élèves pendant les mêmes périodes, indépendamment du revenu des parents.
Les cycles d'apprentissage
Lecycle 1(3 années) correspond à l'éducation préscolaire et s'adresse aux enfants de 3 à 5 ans. Si la première année (éducation précoce) est facultative,l'obligation scolairedemande que tous les enfants visitent l'écoleà partir de 4 ans. L'apprentissage de ce cycle se concentre avant tout surl'expérience socialedes enfants, mais la découverte d’autres langues et de la culture sont également mis en avant.
Lescycles 2 à 4comprennent 2 ans chacun. À la fin de chaque cycle, les élèves doivent acquérir les objectifs d'apprentissage définis, appeléssocles de compétences. Les domaines de compétences à acquérir au primaire sont :
Le saviez-vous?
SUPER SENIORestun service et un réseautage intergénérationnelqui connaît un beau succès! Dans bientôt 23 communes du Luxembourg 29 seniors accompagnent des enfants des écoles fondamentales et les aident àfaire leurs devoirs à domicile, selon leur rythme de travail, et àreprendre confiance en eux. Le projet a été développé par l'ASBLMouvement pour l'égalité des chances pour tous(MEC), avec le soutien financier du groupe d'action localeLEADERRegioun Mëllerdall.
Ce service exceptionnel d'accompagnement scolaire a été sélectionné aussifinaliste dans la catégorie "inclusion sociale" des prestigieux "Rural Inspiration Awards 2021".
Formes d'évaluation
L'évaluation des élèves ne se fait plus à l'aide de points généralisés pour chaque cours, mais en descriptifs détaillés des compétences acquises et de socles atteints. Une évaluation formative au cours du cycle sert à guider les élèves en cours d'apprentissage, tandis qu'une évaluation certificative en fin de cycle sert à déterminer si l'élève a atteint les compétences nécessaires pour continuer au prochain cycle.
Pour le passage à l'enseignement secondaire, uneprocédure d'orientationest mise en place dès le début du cycle 4 pour déterminer le choix le plus approprié à l'élève individuel concernant son entrée dans l'enseignement secondaire. À la fin du cycle 4, les parents et le titulaire expriment une décision d'orientation commune.
Offre scolaire privée
Outre les offres scolaires publiques, il y a aussi11 écoles privées et payantesdans le pays qui appliquent un programme diffèrent au programme officiel (à l'exception del’École Notre-Dame Sainte-Sophie) et qui reçoivent des subventions de l'État.
Dernière modification le11.08.2025
Pour en savoir plus
Congés Scolaires
Enseignement secondaire
Les langues à l’école
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/fr/vivre/education/enseignement-secondaire.html
Enseignement secondaire
L’enseignement secondaire s'adresse aux adolescents à partir de 12 ans. Un moment clé de la vie et de la carrière scolaire, puisqu'il s'agit de choisir sa future carrière, tant scolaire que professionnelle. C'est pour cette raison que les lycées luxembourgeois offrent une variété surprenante d'approches, cours et diplômes.
Accompagner l'élève dans l'atteinte de son objectif
Le système luxembourgeois veut donner à chaque élève une chance de se qualifier au plus haut niveau possible selon ses capacités et ses intérets et quelle que soit son origine. Vu les mutations sociales, linguistiques et technologiques de notre société, cette tâche est ambitieuse, mais le Luxembourg compte atteindre ce but par différents chemins:
Le Luxembourg permet auxlycées eux-mêmes la possibilité de promouvoir l'innovation pédagogique par ses projets d'établissement. Chaque projet d'établissement définit les objectifs qu'un lycée se donne pour les années suivantes, comme par exemple une évaluation basée sur les compétences, un ancrage plus poussé dans sa région, une approche holistique ou une meilleure motivation de l'élève. Le but est de permettre aux lycées de mettre en oeuvre des solutions ciblées et souvent inédites qui répondent aux besoins spécifiques de l'établissement.
Certains lycées offrent des cours dans des domaines qui ne sont enseignés ailleurs, comme par exemple leBrevet de technicien supérieur (BTS) en dessin d'animationau Lycée des Arts et Métiers. Vous êtes un espoir sportif? LeSportlycéeet de ses programmes de haut niveau pour les jeunes talents sportifs est parfaitement adapté à vous. La gastronomie ou le tourisme, ça vous tente? L'Ecole d'hôtellerie et de tourisme du Luxembourgvous prépare à une carrière dans le domaine de l'Horeca. Ainsi, quel que soit l'intérêt, chaque élève trouvera la carrière scolaire qui répond au mieux à ses plans.
L'organisation de l'enseignement secondaire
L'enseignement secondairecomprend 7 années scolaires, divisé en 2 ordres d'enseignement:
Enseignement secondaire classique
L’objectif de l'Enseignement secondaire classique (ESC) est detransmettre des connaissances généralesdans les domaines des sciences humaines et de la littérature, des mathématiques et des sciences naturelles.
Les étudespréparent avant tout aux études supérieures et universitaireset sont sanctionnées par lediplôme de fin d’études secondaires.
Enseignement secondaire général
L’Enseignement secondaire général (ESG) prépare essentiellement à la vie active ou permet de poursuivre des études supérieures. Il est sanctionné par un diplôme de fin d’études secondaires qui permet d'accéder à l'enseignement supérieur.
Formation professionnelle
La formation professionnelle initiale permet aux élèves d'acquérir unequalification professionnelleavec un diplôme correspondant:
Il inclut également lerégime préparatoire, une voie pédagogique spécifique pour les élèves qui n'ont pas suffi aux exigences de l'enseignement fondamental.
Autres offres
Outre les lycées publics, il existe plusieurs institutions d'enseignement secondaire au Luxembourg avec une offre scolaire pour des besoins spécifiques, ainsi que des écoles privées. Sur son site, le ministère de l'Education nationale, de l'Enfance et de la Jeunesse présentel'entièreté de l'offre scolaire au Luxembourg.
Offre scolaire internationale
Certains lycées et écoles internationales au Luxembourg offrent desbaccalauréats internationaux ou européensanglo-, germano- ou francophones adaptés aux besoins spécifiques des différentes communautés au Luxembourg.
Lycées privés
Il existent au Luxembourg10 lycées privéssubventionnés par l'Etat. 5 d'entre eux appliquent les programmes luxembourgeois, les autres formulent leurs propres programmes.
Ecole nationale pour adultes (ENAD)
Fondée sur un concept pédagogique innovateur,l’Ecole nationale pour adultesfait partie intégrante du système scolaire public.
Elle s’adresse à tous lesjeunes de 16 à 30 ans qui, pour des raisons d'échec scolaire ou de mauvais choix d'orientationont décroché de l'école ou qui ne trouvent pas de place d'apprentissage. L’Ecole nationale pour adultes offre à ces jeunes une prise en charge qui se distinguera des modalités offertes dans les lycées, donnant notamment la priorité à l’encadrement et le suivi personnalisé.
Dernière modification le11.08.2025
Enseignement fondamental: offrir les mêmes chances à chacun
Congés Scolaires
Scolarisation des enfants étrangers
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility.html
Mobility
Mobility
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/fr/vivre/mobilite/en-avion.html
En avion
L’aéroport du Findel est le seul aéroport international du Luxembourg, il se trouve à 10 km au nord-est de la capitale.
Des déplacements en avion font gagner un temps considérable. De plus, des prix toujours plus attractifs font de l’avion un moyen de transport très apprécié auprès des passagers. Des arguments de taille qui font que le nombre des passagers ne cesse de grimper.
Luxembourg-Findel, un aéroport moderne
Durant des années, une augmentation du trafic a été enregistrée pour l’aviation générale à l’aéroport de Luxembourg. Et pour cause, la seule aérogare du Grand-Duché se trouve en plein cœur de la Grande-Région et est très prisée tant par les résidents que par les usagers des pays limitrophes. Avec un nombre de passagers qui ne cesse d’accroître chaque année, l’aéroport international de Luxembourg, communément appelé Findel, est en pleine expansion. Pas moins de 4,04 millions de passagers ont emprunté les couloirs du Findel en 2018, contre 3,5 millions en 2017 et 3,02 millions en 2016.
Mais, en dehors desa spécificité géographique, l’aéroport luxembourgeois, qui se trouve à 10 km au nord-est de la capitale, est une bâtisse encore récente. Inauguré en 2008, la nouvelle aérogare est très moderne et la nouvelle structure de 450 m2 accueille les clients ainsi que leurs équipages dans un environnement optimal avec des services haut de gamme.
Qui dit A...
Le terminal B n’accueille que des avions petits porteurs en provenance ou à destination de l’espace Schengen. Ces vols représentent entre 55 et 65% du trafic total de l’aéroport du Findel, et environ 40% de ceux-ci transitent par le terminal B.
Le terminal ‟petit porteur”, développé sous forme de satellite, est accessible par l'actuelle aérogare. Après l'enregistrement du passager et de ses bagages dans l’aérogare actuelle, et après le contrôle de sa carte d'embarquement, il rejoint le terminal B par une passerelle d'une longueur de 108 mètres équipée de tapis roulants et offrant une vue intéressante sur les mouvements s'opérant sur le tarmac.
En chiffres, le terminal B comporte au total 10 portes d’embarquement pour les départs et 6 portes destinées aux arrivées. Il est équipé de 246 sièges d’attente.
Faits et chiffres
Se rendre à l'aéroport
1.   Transport
2.   Parking
Il est facile et pratique de stationner à l’aéroport de Luxembourg. Les automobilistes ont le choix entre plusieurs parkings dont le tarif et la distance par rapport au terminal varient. Les parkings sont accessibles sans réservation préalable. À l’entrée de l’aéroport, des panneaux informent sur la disponibilité de chacun d’entre eux.
Des informations plus détaillées sont disponibles sur le site de Lux-Airport (rubrique "Accès et parking").
Droits des passagers aériens
Vous rencontrez des problèmes au cours de votre voyage? Le Luxembourg applique de nombreux règlements européens en matière de droits des passagers.
Informez-vous sur un des sites suivants:
Sécurité et sûreté aérienne
La Direction de l'aviation civile (DAC), en sa qualité d'autorité de régulation et de surveillance nationale, est en charge de la surveillance de la sécurité et de la sûreté des activités aériennes civiles et est compétente pour les licences, certificats, agréments, approbations etc. requis par la législation ou la réglementation en vigueur.
Voici quelques informations utiles aux voyageurs en matière de sécurité et sûreté aérienne:
Dernière modification le13.03.2026
Aventures à vélo: Parcourez le Luxembourg en douceur
Transports publics
Se déplacer en voiture
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education.html
Education
Education
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/education/langues-lecole.html
Languages at school
Luxembourg is a cosmopolitan society, with multiple languages spoken on a daily basis among residents, expatriate communities and cross-border workers. So it is only natural that Luxembourg's education system also gives pupils the opportunity to grow and learn in a multilingual environment from their very early years.
Languages and the way they work in the education system
Multilingualismin schools in Luxembourg represents astrengthin an open, diversified world, but also achallengefor pupils with different linguistic backgrounds. The Luxembourg education system is mainly based onGerman and French. German is the language of instruction at primary school and for the first years of secondary school, while French is used to teach most subjects in the upper years of secondary school. But Luxembourg is also pursuing a policy to diversify its school options, offeringinternational French- and English-speaking classes, welcome classes and a system of intercultural mediators.
Primary education: learning the administrative languages
Primary education in Luxembourg is composed of four two-year cycles. In the first cycle (children aged 3 to 5), the curriculumplaces strong emphasis on learning Luxembourgish. Following the adoption of a programme for multilingual education in crèches (nurseries),familiarising children with French is now also one of the objectives of the first cycle of schooling.
In the subsequent cycles (ages 6-12),literacy is taught in German, which is also the language of instruction for all other subjects except French lessons. Pupils are taught spokenFrenchin the second cycle and written French in the third cycle.
Secondary school: language diversification
The use of languages inthe secondary education curriculum varies according to the chosen system,but language learning continues to play a central role.Germanremains the language of instruction in the first years of secondary school in all subjects apart from French and maths.
Frenchbecomesthe language of instruction in classical secondary educationfrom the fourth year.Englishis taught from the second year to all pupils except those in theLatin section, who start English one year later. Pupils who wish to do so can adda fourth modern languagelike Italian, Spanish or Portuguese from their fifth year.
Ingeneral secondary education,Germanmostly remains the language of instruction, with some exceptions (certain subjects, classes with a specific language regime, etc.).
Welcoming children in their language(s)
Given the multilingual population in Luxembourg,it is not unusual to seepupils who do not speak any of the country's three administrative languages joining the educational system. For these pupils,Luxembourg's secondary schoolsoffer specific programmes, including intensive tutoring in French or German, classes taught in French, welcome and integration classes, as well as classes for English speakers.
Alongside Luxembourg's mainstream public schools, there are alsointernational schools, open to all pupils at primary or secondary level without fees, which prepare pupils for an International Baccalaureate in French, English or German. Some of these schools also offer classes at preschool level.
Finally,private international schoolsalso offer multilingual education. At these schools, Luxembourgish is taught to all pupils as a foreign language.
Find out more aboutall the available school optionshere.
An international university
Multilingualismis one of thekey principlesof theUniversity of Luxembourg. The teaching languages are generallyFrench and German. Some study programmes also require a good command ofEnglish, and the University offers a programme inLuxembourgish Linguistics and Literature.
Did you know?
Apilot projectwas launched at the beginning of the 2022-2023 academic year in four primary schools to give pupils the possibility of learning to read and write in French.Literacy in Frenchis optional for pupils in cycles 1 and 2. The aim of the project is to improve pupils' chances of success by offering a flexible, diverse approach to language learning. You can find more details about the programme "ALPHA – Zesumme wuessen" in themagazine EDI(no. 1 – 2025) published by the Luxembourg Ministry of Education, Children and Youth.
Last update13.03.2026
For more information
Fundamental education: creating equal opportunities
Secondary education
Schooling for foreign children
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/societe-et-culture/histoire/rues-au-feminin-i.html
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (I)
To mark International Women's Day, celebrated on 8th March in several countries worldwide, we look at the profiles of eight extraordinary women in Luxembourg's history who are remembered in the country's public space. This is an opportunity to look back at their past struggles and achievements, and also to inspire future generations of women, those who will have streets named after them in Luxembourg in the years to come. This first article explores the lives ofMarie-Thérèse Hartmann, Aline de Saint-Hubert, Lou Koster and Joséphine Jaans. Asecond articlewill focus on the achievements ofMarie Heffenisch, Lily Unden, Annette Lacroix and Marie-Paule Peffer.
Marie-Thérèse Hartmann (1858-1923), a pioneering painter
Marie-Thérèse Hartmann wasone of the first Luxembourgish women to study abroad. Her father, the architect Antoine Hartmann, supported his daughter in herartistic education. At the tender age of 19 she went toDüsseldorfto study with the artist Gustav Süs, then spent two years inMunichas a student of Sandor Liezen-Mayer. It was inParis, at the school run by Émile Carolus-Duran and Jean-Jacques Henner, recently opened to female artists, that she found her vocation as a portrait painter. When she came back to Luxembourg, she married the lawyer Mathias Glaesener and pursued her artistic career.
Thepioneering painterwas characterised by her audacity and independence, at a time when very few women were able to attend public schools; those who did receive an education generally went to religious schools. Luxembourg City and Sanem have streets named after her.
Did you know?
You can see two portraits of former Luxembourg Prime Minister Paul Eyschen by Marie-Thérèse Hartmann in theNationalmusée um Fëschmaart.
Aline de Saint-Hubert (1874-1947), a feminist philanthropist
Aline de Saint-Hubert can be considered as thefounder of the bourgeois women's movementin Luxembourg. She married Émile Mayrisch in 1894 andin 1906 she set up the Organisation for Women's Interests, the first women's organisation in Luxembourg. The association was active in various fields, including providing legal protection for women and improving living conditions for worker families.
But the main aim was toestablish a secondary school for girls: a non-denominational school offering a school certificate that would give girls access to university studies and liberal professions.
Aline de Saint-Hubert also pioneered various social movements and was thefounder and chair of the Luxembourg section of the Red Cross. In 1932, Grand Duchess Charlotte awarded her theCross of Honour for Ladies of the Order of Civil and Military Merit of Adolph of Nassau.
In her will, shebequeathed theChâteau de Colpachto the Red Cross in. The building is now a rehabilitation facility that houses the National Post-Oncological Rehabilitation Service and the National Physical Rehabilitation Service. The towns of Bertrange, Dudelange, Esch-sur-Alzette, Walferdange and Steinfort have named roads and public spaces after her. Her married name was also used for theLycée Aline Mayrisch.
Did you know?
Aline de Saint-Hubert was also interested in art and literature, and she sought tomediate between French and German cultures. She was an admirer and friend of many intellectuals and writers, including André Gide, and she turned herChâteau de Colpach– where she settled with her husband in 1920 – into aliterary salonand a meeting place for artists.
She also wroteliterary articles and reviews, as well as an autobiographicaltravel memoir:"Paysages de la trentième année". She often wrote under pseudonyms, the most well known being Alain Desportes.
A book containing her correspondence with André Gide is available at theNational Library of Luxembourg.
Les rues au féminin
In 2009, theNational Council of Women of Luxembourg(Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg-CNFL) launched the projectLes rues au féminin(Streets  named after women) to raise awareness among political leaders of the need to increase the visibility of deserving, active women in public spaces in Luxembourg.
As part of the project, a list of streets compiled in 2021 showed howwomen are under-represented in public streets, squares and buildingscompared with men. In Luxembourg City, for example, just 5.7% of streets and squares were named after women, compared with 49% named after men. In that year,of the 102 municipalities in Luxembourg, 59 had no public spaces named after women. It is not just about the figures, but rather what they represent: 'We need to remember that the names of streets, squares or buildings arevectors of memoryand that this gives them a political aspect. As this official memory is selective, it isimportant not to forget deserving and committed womenand to make them visible in public places,' explains the CNFL.
Lou Koster (1889-1973), a pioneering composer
Lou Koster was one ofvery few girls in Luxembourg who had access to musical education in childhood. In the absence of formal education, her grandfather, Franz Ferdinand Bernhard Hoebich,Kapellmeisterat the Grand Ducal Court, gave hermusical theory, violin and pianolessons. Her formal education at a musical institution only began when the Conservatoire de Luxembourg was founded in Luxembourg City in 1906 and she was able to perfect her violin, piano, music theory and harmony skills. Shetaught at the Conservatoire herself between 1908 and 1954. When it came tocomposition and orchestration, she wasself-taught.
As a composer – her real passion – she was particularly interested in Luxembourgish poetry. Her adaptation of Batty Weber's libretto"An der Schwemm"("In the swimming pool") as an operetta marked the beginning of her career as a composer in 1922. It was in 1972, at the age of 83, that she experienced her greatest success, when her oratorio"Der Geiger von Echternach"("The violinist of Echternach"), based on a text by Nik Welter, was played by the RTL Orchestra and the Uelzecht Choir in the Basilica of Echternach.
Her musical career never distracted her from herinvolvement in social issues and efforts to improve the rights of oppressed people and minorities, especially feminist movements. Streets in Luxembourg City, Mersch and Strassen are named after her.
A little anecdote
In Lou Koster's family, musical education was not just a hobby. Lou and her sisters, Lina and Laure, learned from a young age how to make a living through music: they accompanied silent films and performed in café-concerts, for weddings and parties... and also in swimming pools. Lou Koster was an enthusiastic swimmer, and during the breaks in her swimming classes at the LuxembourgSwimming Club, she provided a piano accompaniment for the musical interludes played by an orchestra positioned above the shower cubicles.
Joséphine Jaans (1890-1988), a pioneer in women's sport
Joséphine Jaans (married name Jacquemart) can be considered as apioneer in women's sport in Luxembourg. She was proactive and committed to sport, dedicating herself to what would become her profession. After attending two gymnastics training camps in Switzerland, she became a teacher and startedteaching at theLycée de Jeunes Filles d'Esch-sur-Alzettein 1916, where she sought to introducenew approaches to physical education.
In1925, together with Andrée Mayrisch and Paula Weber, shefounded the Luxembourg Women's Sport Federation, the first official women's sports body. The founders chose basketball as the flagship discipline of the new federation – a successful strategy, as by 1926 Luxembourg had 14 women's clubs! But the enterprise was doomed to failure: a lack of financial resources and especially thequestion of appropriate clothingproved to be too great an obstacle in a traditionalist context which rejected a woman considered too modern for her time. Joséphine Jaans refused to let that stop her, however, and in1937she organised the thirdFederal Women's Gymnastics Festival, where she led the parade.
Her efforts were not limited to women's sport. During theSecond World War, she joined theLëtzebuerger Patriote Liga, a resistance movementthat fought against the German occupation. In 1941, she was arrested with two other resistance fighters and spent two years in prison. After the war, she worked to help people in need. Luxembourg City and Bertrange have named streets after her.
Did you know?
Joséphine Jaans firmly believed that women should be allowed to compete at the Olympic Games. Given the stiff opposition within the leadership of the International Olympic Committee, a number of women, including Alice Milliat from France but also Joséphine Jaans, had the idea of organising Olympic Games for women. The firstWomen's World Gameswere held in Paris on 20 August1922.
Several sources were used to write the biographies of the women presented in this article, especially theLes rues au fémininproject (National Council of Women of Luxembourg /Conseil national des femmes du Luxembourg), the Fraendag.lu project (CIDFraen an Gender) and theDictionnaire des auteurs luxembourgeois(National Literature Centre /Centre national de la littérature).
Last update23.02.2026
For more information
Pioneering Women from Luxembourg
Luxembourg women in sport: 8 portraits for 8th March (I)
Streets named after women: paying tribute to great women from Luxembourg (II)
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/activities.html
Activities
Activities
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/relaxing.html
Relaxing
Relaxing
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visiter/arts-et-culture/patrimoine-architectural-luxembourgeois-i-esch-sur-alzette.html
Architectural walk in Esch-sur-Alzette
Are you an architecture buff? With more than 1,200 protected buildings and objects, Luxembourg is a great place to walk around. In this first article on the built heritage, we suggest an architectural walk inEsch-sur-Alzette. So put on some comfortable shoes, and you might even like to bring along a pair of binoculars to check out the intricate details in these open-air historical sites!
Esch-sur-Alzette- an unsuspected melting-pot of European architecture
A bit of historybefore you start out on this architectural walk. AlthoughEsch-sur-Alzettewas first mentioned in 773, it was Henri IV, Count of Luxembourg, who granted the town its freedom in 1287.Esch-sur-Alzettewas fortified in 1311, then dismantled in 1671; its growth is largely due to the discovery in 1838 ofminetteiron ore. Thereafter the rural village became a prosperous industrial centre, striding forward. 1906 was a key year, marked by the implementation of the Wirtz-Krasnick scheme, which laid down the alignment of the town's streets. This was followed in 1924 by the improvement scheme and new districts designed by the German town planner Joseph Stübben.
Throughout these years the initiators were German, Belgian and French as well as Luxembourgish, and the influences of Germanic and Latin architecture are evident.
That makesEsch-sur-Alzettea real melting-pot of European architecture. This5kmwalk will show you a number of architectural expressions connected withHistoricism,Art Nouveau,Modernism,Functionalismandcontemporary architecture.
The starting point for the walk proposed by theEscher Infofabrik– the tourist reception and information office of the town of Esch – is theBerwart Tower(1721), which used to be the entrance porch to the baroque chateau of the lords of Berwart.Past, present and futurestand side by side at this first stage of the walk: next to the tower, two modern galleries lead to an administrative building – belonging nowadays to Arcelor Mittal – with a 1995 metal structure which was awarded the first European prize for the best steel construction.
It would be impossible to give details here of the 34 stopping points on the walk; here is a small selection representing the different styles to be discovered:
Avirtual walkincluding the main sites is also available thanks to the University of Luxembourg's Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (C2DH). This is a series of videos showing the development of the main town in the iron ore region, and its buildings. A visit not to be missed, from the comfort of your armchair!
Historical and architectural guide to Esch-sur-Alzette – Rue de l'Alzette (Part 1) (Video/Audio)
Virtual walk in the rue de l'Alzette of the historical and architectural guide Esch-sur-Alzette of the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (in French). © C2DH / Université du Luxembourg.
Guide historique et architectural Esch-sur-Alzette - Villa Olivo (Video/Audio)
Discover the Villa Olivo in the historical and architectural guide Esch-sur-Alzette of the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (in French). © C2DH / Université du Luxembourg.
National Institute for Architectural Heritage
Luxembourg's history can be seen in the facades of the many buildings that are protected and preserved as part of the country's architectural heritage. The various criteria used for determining and then promoting the built heritage need to be objective; in the Grand Duchy they are decided on by theNational Institute for Architectural Heritage: Heritage sites may be chosen because they are ancient, they hold particular interest in terms of architecture and history of art, they are particularly rare, they serve as a place of remembrance or they are highly typical. The procedure is intended to guarantee the selection of a series of architectural sites that represents the country's cultural identity.
Page 1 |2
Last update09.03.2026
For more information
Architectural walk around Luxembourg City
Sightseeing tours: history, nature, architecture and steel industry on foot
Luxembourgish architecture – smart constructions and international reputation
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visiter/les-regions/ardennes.html
Éislek: adventure awaits
To the north of the Grand Duchy lies the tourist region of the Éislek, also known as the Ardennes in French and Ösling in German. The region is a genuine treasure trove for outdoor adventure enthusiasts and home to two nature reserves as well as Luxembourg's largest lake. The Éislek also offers an invitation to step back in time and explore its castles and places of remembrance of the Second World War.
Éislek, adventures in nature and remembrance tourism
An outdoor haven for adventure lovers, the Éislek region invites you to embrace nature in all its beauty. Actually, two Luxembourg natural reserves are situated in this region. In the south-west lies theNaturpark Öewersauern; its landscape is marked by the river Sûre and the Upper Sûre lake. It is the perfect location for water-based sports and leisure activities. In the north, theNaturpark Ouris characterised by its ever-changing landscapes, ranging from a vast plateau to narrow valleys carved out of the rock. In this reserve, adventure enthusiasts are spoilt for choice with countless hiking trails to suit all levels of fitness.
The Luxembourg Ardennes is also a location of historical remembrance. The Second World War marked one of the darkest chapters in the Grand Duchy's history. In the final months of the conflict, theBattle of the Bulgeravaged the north of the country, leaving scars that are still visible today. With its various monuments, museums and trails, the region is an exceptional point of interest for remembrance tourism.
Éislek & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
How to explore the Éislek
Exploring nature on foot
If you love long-distance trails, Éislek is the place to be:
If you enjoy hiking, but preferless demanding trails, you can also do so in the Eislek. In fact, the region hasover 200 trailswith clear, uniform signposts and plenty of information boards.
Discover nature with your feet in the water
If you're more of anaquatic adventurer, then head for the Lac de la Haute-Sûre. you can enjoy a wide range of activities and also relax in the authorised swimming areas.
Exploring local heritage: castles and culture
The Éislek region is enlightening andenriching with castles, festivals and UNESCO-labelled culture. Here is a selection of the places to visit and activities to enjoy:
A look back at history: remembrance tourism
Places of remembrance help us to better understand history and how the past has shaped our modern times. There are many such examples in the Éislek region and each one highlights the importance of peace and mutual understanding. Here is a small selection:
Last update22.11.2024
For more information
Mullerthal: fascinating geology and traditions
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/societe-et-culture/creation-artistique/edward-steichen.html
Edward Steichen
The Steichen Collections Luxembourg bring together heritage items connected with the long and varied career of Edward J. Steichen (1879-1973), with a particular emphasis on photography. A number of public collections provide evidence of his prolific work both as a photographer and as an exhibition curator for the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York: the collections held byMusée national d'archéologie, d'histoire et d'art(MNAHA), the City of Luxembourg, and the Grand Duchy's National Audiovisual Centre (Centre national de l'audiovisuel- CNA).
As a tribute to his country of origin,Steichen bequeathed a large part of his work to the Grand Duchy: the famous exhibition "The Family of Man" (1955) in Clervaux and the collection "The Bitter Years" (1962) in Dudelange illustrate his work as curator at the MoMA, while the collection held by the MNAHA, which can be viewed free of charge in the city centre in theNationalmusée um Fëschmaart, represents a cross-section of his career as a photographer.
In Luxembourg City it is also possible to view some of Steichen's photographs in theAm Tunnelgallery at theBanque et caisse d’épargne de l’État, where a permanent display area is devoted to his work.
Edward Steichen (1879-1973)
Edward Steichen was born in Bivange on 27 March 1879, and left his native country in 1881 when his family emigrated to the United States. Steichen began taking photographs at the age of 16, going on to become one of the most famous photographers of the twentieth century.
From 1922 to 1937, Steichen worked as head photographer atCondé Nast(which publishes Vanity Fair andVogue), producing an impressive number of portraits of celebrities.From 1947 to 1962, he was Director of the Department of Photography at theMuseum of Modern Art(MOMA) in New York, where he curated 44 exhibitions.
In 1963, when he met Grand Duchess Charlotte at the White House during her State visit, Steichen introduced himself ase Lëtzebuerger Jong(a Luxembourgish boy).
Steichen passed away in Connecticut in 1973, shortly before his 94th birthday.
The Bitter Years - CNA
"The Bitter Years" is a tribute to documentary photography, bringing together more than200 images from one of the largest collective projects in the history of photography: the documentation of rural America during the Great Depression by the Farm Security Administration.
Created in 1962 by Eward Steichen for the Museum of Modern Art in New York (MoMA), the collection was exhibited between 2012 and 2020 in theWaassertuermgallery, a former water tower, which is located next to theNational Audiovisual Centrein Dudelange. After its closure in December 2020, making way for new projects, it will be housed in the CNA archives, where it will be analysed and appraised with a view to its further appearance.
The Family of Man - CNA
"The Family of Man" is acollection of 503 photographs by 273 artists from 68 countries, compiled by Edward Steichen for the MoMA. The exhibition, first presented in 1955, is intended to serve as a manifesto for peace and the fundamental equality of mankind, through post-war humanist photography.
After a world tour of more than 150 museums, the final, complete version of the exhibition wasinstalled permanently in Clervaux Castle in 1994. The exhibition was placed onUNESCO's Memory of the World Registerin 2003.
Nationalmusée um Fëschmaart: Steichen - The Photographer
Steichen was known for his work as Director of the Department of Photography at the MoMA in New York, but he was also a major figure in the history of photography: his personal work marks the passage from pictorialism to straight photography.
The MNAHA devotes one room exclusively to Edward Steichen's photographic production, with acollection of 178 photographs representative of his careerthat the artist bequeathed to the Luxembourg State in 1985. TheMNAHAalso holds and displays thecollection owned by the Luxembourg City'sPhotographic Library, comprising 44 photographs by Steichen.
For conservation reasons, the full set of 222 photographs can be viewed in two-monthly cycles, each exhibition presenting about twenty photographs arranged by theme.
Edward Steichen Award Luxembourg
TheEdward Steichen Award Luxembourgis a contemporary art prize set up in 2004 to mark the 125th anniversary of Edward Steichen's birth. It is awarded every two years, and gives a young European artist the opportunity to undertake a residency in New York.
Last update07.10.2024
For more information
UNESCO heritage in Luxembourg: history, art, traditions and nature
Contemporary artists in Luxembourg: current, responsive, in dialogue
From graffiti to street art in Luxembourg
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visiter/activites/activites-enfants.html
Activities for children: family adventures, culture, and nature
Looking for ideas for a family outing? Want to pass on your passion for nature, culture, or science to your children? With its adventure parks, castles, museums, festivals and events, Luxembourg is a safe bet. Here's our selection of activities in the four corners of the country.
Adventure, here I come!
Would you like to experience an exciting adventure with your family? So put your courage to the test in one of our manyadventure parks.Echternach, the oldest town of Luxembourg, is home to theyouth hostel, which boasts a 14-metre high climbing wall. If you'd rather expend your energy in the South of Luxembourg, theParc Le'h Adventuresis a great option. It offers monkey bridges, zip lines, Tarzan jumps and even a Bambini trail for the littlest ones. Or why not go toSteinfort Adventure, near the Belgian border? It's a treetop adventure park with 10 trails offering various levels of difficulty.
For families who prefer more quiet discovery-filled activities, theParc Merveilleuxin Bettembourgwill be your cup of tea. You can watch from up close some animals originating from five continents - an unmissable experience! Before or after a nice meal at one of the park's two restaurants, children can expend their energy and enjoy the many attractions, such as a playground and mini-golf.
Relax and let your children have fun!
Playgrounds are a great opportunity to unwind, and the most famous ones can be found in the capital. Your children can revel in parks such as Merl Park, the Kockelscheuer playground or the Municipal Park's well-known pirate ship. Discover the capital's playgrounds on thewebsite of Luxembourg City.
Outside the City of Luxembourg, theMersch municipal parkis also a perfect place to relax with its colourful children's playgrounds. Moreover, thanks to the ecological use of the park, fauna and flora can be seen around the lake and from the terrace of the pavilion!
Want to take your kids to playgrounds beyond your neighbourhood?
With theSpillplaz.luApp you can search by postcode or city, but also by sorting other criteria: areas for children under 3 years old, covered playgrounds or nearby restaurants, for example. All this in four languages: French, English, German and Luxembourgish.
Information is also available on the websitewww.spillplaz.lu.
Discover history and culture as a family
As part of a family outing, find out about the Grand Duchy's different traditions, customs and tourist attractions. Lovers of knights and princesses will delight in the country's manycastles:Koerich CastleorVianden Castleall host during the summer fabulous medieval festivals that will immerse you into a whole new world. In Luxembourg City, why not take a tour of the fortress, theBock Casematesor thePetrusse Casemates? Don't forget that theGrand Ducal Palaceis open to the public from July to September!
If you are an art lover, you'll fall for Luxembourg's museums, which are the perfection alternative for not so sunny days. Please note that most of them offer special activities for children:MUDAMoffers guided tours for children, theCasino-Forum for Contemporary Artorganises guided tours and workshops for children and young people and theNationalmusée um Fëschmaartwelcomes children to creative workshops. Please note that theTramsmusée(Tram Museum) and theVitariumoffer tours that are specifically adapted to family visits.
In April 2024, a museum dedicated entirely to children opened its doors in Wiltz:PlommKannermusée. Reserved for 1-12-year-olds and their families, the museum is designed around participation, whether in the permanent exhibition, the Tree of Tales, or in the creative workshops.
A day exploring nature
A wide range of nature activities can be enjoyed in Luxembourg, which will no doubt spark your children's curiosity. TheNational Natural History Museumtakes you on a path of discovery of our planet and offers activities for children via itsScience ClubandPanda Club. TheWasserbillig Aquariumand theButterfly Garden, as well as theTouristic Domain of the Ardennes Draught Horse Robbesscheierwhere you can discover workhorses of the Ardennes, are fascinating for the young and old alike.
In order to raise your children's awareness, training courses and workshops organised by the Centre for Nature Protection that goes by the nameD'Haus vun der Naturare experiences not to be missed. If you would rather discover Luxembourgish landscapes in peace and quiet, a great family activity is to visit one of the various lakes of the country.Remerschen Lake,Upper Sûre LakeandEchternach Lakeare the most popular ones. What's more, trips to these lakes can easily be combined with other activities, such as adventure parks!
Last update20.02.2026
For more information
Tours for children: nature and biodiversity for little ones
Musical activities for young people
Geocaching: treasure hunting
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visiter/les-regions/guttland.html
Guttland: the land of slow tourism and hidden treasures
The tourist region of Guttland lies in the centre and west of Luxembourg. Its name is evocative of its most characteristic feature - the good land - which is a tribute to its fertile soils.  It also offers an open invitation to leave everyday stress behind and embrace slow tourism along hundreds of kilometres of footpaths and bicycle paths. Castles, Gallo-Roman ruins, rural museums, unspoilt landscapes with hidden treasures and local gastronomy await you with open arms in the heart of the Grand Duchy.
Guttland, an invitation to slow down
Slow travel is the antithesis of traditional tourism. Instead of rushing from one famous landmark to another in a crowd of tourists, the idea of slow travel is to explore the areas off the beaten track in a more conscious, unhurried manner.
Slow tourism has become the motto of this region, which offersslow cyclingtours,slow tripsand the (re)discovery of thehidden treasuresand traditions.
In Guttland, slow travel also meanshigh-quality gastronomy. Local produce from the region's fertile soils is given pride of place on menus. There is a wide range of culinary options, including small brasseries as well as Michelin-starred restaurants.
Guttland, Moselle & Mullerthal (Video/Audio YouTube)
Exploring Guttland
Discovering nature on foot
A host of walking trails await you. Here's a small selection below:
Cycling through Luxembourg's heritage and landscapes
Explore the scenic landscapes and fascinating culture of the region via one of the many leisurely bicycle paths. Here is a small selection, all starting at Useldange castle:
Castles and Roman villas: a journey through time
A trip to Guttland is a journey through time, from the prehistoric to the present day.
History enthusiasts can visit:
Guttland is a dream come true for castelophiles!The Eisch Valley, also known as theValley of the Seven Castles, is one of the country's major tourist attractions. It is named after its seven castles: Mersch, Schoenfels, Hollenfels, the old and new castles of Ansembourg, Septfontaines and Koerich.
Even today, these castles regularly come to life during the various markets and festivities held on site throughout the year.
TheValley of the Seven Castles can also be explored by carin one day. You can immerse yourself in 1,000 years of history, concentrated in an area of 25km, and enjoy a vast array medieval architecture, which is hard to find anywhere else in Europe.
Villages, traditions and local cuisine
Did you know that one of the country's most popular crafts originated in Guttland?The Péckvillercherare earthenware whistling birdsmade from clay and are displayed in Nospelt for theÉimaischenfolk festival on Easter Monday.
There are also a number of museums where you can discover the region's traditions, which are often linked to local produce and rural life:
If you're a fan oflocal beer and cuisine, take a culinary tour of Kleinbettingen, a village renowned for its cereals, which are exported across Europe. If you prefer your spirits or eaux-de-vie (in moderation, of course!), then tryLuxembourgishDrëppen,a name derived from the wordDrëps, which means drop or small quantity of liquid in Luxembourgish.
In the27 municipalities which form the Guttland, traditional local culture and modernity go hand-in-hand. We invite you to take a leisurely tour through this region and experience some unforgettable moments.
Last update20.05.2025
For more information
Moselle, the wine-growing region with a European heart
Luxembourg City: the European capital with 1,000 years of history
Éislek: adventure awaits
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/tourismus/entspannung/kreuzfahrt-mosel-luxemburg.html
Kreuzfahrten auf der Mosel
Luxemburgs Moselregion ist seit Jahrzehnten ein sehr beliebtes Ausflugs- und Urlaubsziel. Unglaubliche Landschaften, malerische Dörfer, prämierte Weine und gastronomische Versuchungen liefern ein abwechslungsreiches Angebot für Aktivurlauber, Feinschmecker und Entdecker. Alles dies bieten auch die auf der Mosel verkehrenden Passagierschiffe! Einmal an Bord, können Sie nicht nur bequem von einem Hafen zum nächsten gelangen, sondern auch die einzigartige Kulisse langsam an Sich vorbeiziehen lassen und entspannen.
Luxemburg vom Fluss aus entdecken
Auf 37,3km Länge fließt die Mosel zwischen Luxemburg und Deutschland, dies vor einermalerischen Kulisse, in der Weinberge und Dörfer sich abwechseln.Die beiden in Luxemburg ansässigen Betreiber, Navitours undEntente Moselle, bieten mehrere Rund-, Schleusen- und Tagesfahrten an, die nach Fahrplan an den verschiedenen Häfen anlegen. FürNavitours befahren drei Schiffe die Mosel,Riverdiva,Roude LéiwundMuselschëff, während dieEntentemit derMSMarie-Astridwohl das bekannteste Passagierschiff betreibt. DieMarie-Astrid, wie sie von den Luxemburgern genannt wird, steht seit 1966 für die Flusskreuzfahrten auf der Mosel; das aktuelle, topmoderne Schiff ist die fünfte Generation.
Die MSMarie-Astridund die Schengen-Verträge
Am 14. Juni 1985 wurden an Bord der zweiten MSMarie-AstriddasSchengener Abkommenvon fünf Mitgliedsstaaten der EU unterzeichnet. Von 1992 bis 2021 fuhr es als MS Regensburg auf der Donau. Im Jahr 2021 erwarb Luxemburg das Schiff, baute es zu einem Ausstellungsraum um und errichtete einen neuen Kai in Schengen. Das Schiff wird nun in einem seetüchtigen Zustand gehalten und liegt in Schengen in der Nähe des Europäischen Schengen-Museums vor Anker.
Die Schiffe fahren zu festen Zeiten die verschiedenen Anleger an, so dass man bequem zu- oder aussteigen kann wo man möchte.
Mit beiden Linien können Sie die Moselnicht nur vom Fluss aus entdecken, sondern sich auch Zeit nehmen, dem Charme der Dörfer und Städte zu erliegen, die Sie entdecken werden. Dabei können Sie ganz einfach Wanderungen mit einer entspannenden Flusskreuzfahrt verbinden und nach einer Tour durch die hügelige Landschaft und ihre natürlichen Schätze den Tag gemütlich an Deck bei einem Gläschen Crémant ausklingen zu lassen.
Orte wieWormeldange, Bech-Kleinmacher, Remich und Grevenmacher sind nicht nur wegen der vielen dort ansässigen Winzer einen Besuch wert. Sie sind auchAusgangspunkt zu den umliegenden Wander- und Radwegen, und laden darüber hinaus zum Flanieren über die Esplanade ein.Schengen sticht mit seinembekannten Europamuseumhier heraus. Der Name alleine steht gleichbedeutend für ein offenes Europa, und wo wenn nicht im Dreiländereck Deutschland-Frankreich-Luxemburg ist diese Grenzenlosigkeit quasi greifbar.
Mit allen Sinnen genießen
Natürlich können Sie auch einen ganzen Tag an Bord verbringen und stets neue Aussichten entdecken.Tagesfahrten nach Trier, Bernkastel und Saarburg in Deutschland, sowie ins französischeThionvillebringen Ihnen auch diese Städte und ihre Sehenswürdigkeiten näher und erlauben es Ihnen, eine ganze Region entspannt zu erkunden.
Dabei wird an Bord vor allem Wert auf Qualität gelegt. Nicht nur die Schiffe sind auf dem neusten Stand der Technik, sondern auch derService und die kulinarischen Spezialitäten die Sie an Bord erwarten erfüllen hohe Standards. Egal ob es ein kleiner Snack sein soll, oder "à la carte", hier bleiben keine Wünsche offen.
Für größere Events, wie Hochzeiten oder Betriebsfeiern, besteht sogar die Möglichkeit, einSchiff komplett zu mieten.
Andere Aktivitäten
Neugierig auf mehr?
Luxemburgs größte Wasserstraße ist auch wegen ihrerzahlreichen Aktivitäten rund um die Mosel bekannt.
Aktivurlauber können sich ans Wakeboarden wagen, oder beim Kanuwandern oder Fischen eine Auszeit gönnen. Für Naturliebhaber empfiehlt sich darüber hinaus einBesuch desBiodiversumsHaff Réimech, ein Naturreservatder besonderen Art.
Sind Sie eher der Entspannte? Dann nehmen Sie SichZeit für Sich imThermalbad inMondorf-les-Bainsoder genießen Sie die Sonne an den Baggerweihern in Remerschen.
Egal was Ihre Vorlieben sind, ob Sie als Tagestourist anreisen oder länger bei uns bleiben möchten,die Region wird Sie verzaubern.
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am11.03.2026
Mehr wissen
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Natur für jedermann: Komfort-Wanderwege
Wanderungen (I): Müllerthal und Mosel
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/tourismus/entspannung/unterkunfte-land-entspannung-nature.html
Unterkünfte auf dem Land: Entspannung inmitten der Natur
Haben Sie Lust, Tag und Nacht mit der Natur eins zu werden? Mit über 5.000km an Wanderwegen, unzähligen Schlössern und Burgen am Rand der Wälder und einem Radwegenetz, das unaufhaltsam ausgebaut wird, ist Luxemburg ein ideales Ziel, um die Natur tagsüber... und zunehmend auch nachts zu genießen. Die traditionelle Unterbringung auf dem Land entwickelt sich in Luxemburg weiter, um Lösungen wieGlampling Cabins, attraktive Stellplätze für Besucher mit Wohnmobilen oder kuriose Unterkünfte anzubieten. Das Ganze mit dem Ziel eines ständigen Kontakts mit der Natur und zwecks Entspannung!
Glamping, Camping trifft auf Luxus
Die von Campingplätzen angebotenen Leistungen haben sich in letzter Zeit enorm weiterentwickelt. Die mit in unserer Vorstellung von einer rustikalen Unterkunft, die uns die Natur intensiv erleben lässt, assoziierten Lösungen kommen nunmehr einemtotalen, sogarcharmantenoderluxuriösen Komfortnäher. Das Wort "Glamping" ist in der Tat eine Verkürzung des Ausdrucks "Glamour Camping".
Seit Jahren ergänzen die Campingplätze in Luxemburg ihr traditionelles Angebot an Grünflächen, auf denen wir unser Zelt aufschlagen oder unser Wohnmobil abstellen können, um Hütten. Im Rahmen dieser Lösungen wurden einst kleine Holzhäuser in glamouröse Lodges und Hütten umgestaltet, die für Menschen bestimmt sind, die den totalen Komfort unweit von Grünflächen, die sie tagsüber erkunden, suchen.
Da es uns nicht möglich ist, das ganze Angebot im Großherzogtum zu präsentieren, hier eine kleine Auswahl:
Möchten Sie alle Campingplätze undGlamping-Alternativen in Luxemburg entdecken? Dann schauen Sie auf der Websitevisitluxembourg.lunach.
DasGlampingwird sich in Luxemburg zweifellosweiterentwickeln. Das Land investiert in der Tat in den Ausbau eines Netzwerks voninnovativen touristischen Unterkünften auf dem Land, undGlamping Cabinswerden beispielsweise auch inBurgen und Schlössernoderöffentlichen Parksaufgestellt.
Wohnmobile, das Angebot wird vielfältiger
Wie daheim oder im Hotel schlafen, jedoch draußen und inklusive eines Ortswechsels je nach Lust und Laune. So lautet die Idee, die mehr und mehr Menschen verzaubert, die ihren Urlaub im Wohnmobil oder Mobilheim verbringen möchten, ohne dabei auf Komfort verzichten zu wollen.
Haben Sie Lust auf eine erste Wohnwagenerfahrung? In Luxemburg können Sie Ihr fahrendes Zuhause bei mehreren Anbieternmieten:
In Luxemburg können SieIhren Wohnwagenauf einemCampingplatz abstellenund dabei in den Genuss zusätzlicher Leistungen wie Waschküchen oder Schwimmbäder gelangen oder an einemkostenlosen Stellplatz außerhalb des Campingplatzes, wenn Sie nur einen kurzen Zwischenstopp einlegen. Häufig inmitten der grünen Natur gelegen, sind diese Plätze von den großen Verkehrsachsen aus leicht zu erreichen. Entdecken Sie alle Möglichkeiten auf der Websitevisitluxembourg.lu.
Luxemburg, "Destination Camper Park(ing)"
Luxemburg setzt sich für die Schaffung eineslandesweiten Netzes von Wohnmobilstellplätzenein, das über das klassische Konzept eines Parkplatzes hinausgeht. Denn es geht darum, den neuen Erwartungen der passionierten Wohnmobilreisenden gerecht zu werden, die bei ihren Kurzaufenthalten (2 bis 3 Tage) nicht auf hochwertige Dienstleistungen verzichten möchten. Das Projekt sieht Standorte in der Nähe von Sehenswürdigkeiten, am Rande von Dörfern in ländlichen Gebieten oder innerhalb von Grünanlagen vor. Der Ansatz ist nicht mehr der eines Parkplatzes, sondern der eines angenehmen Aufenthaltsortes mit geselligen Gemeinschaftsräumen, großzügig bemessenen Stellplätzen und einer Gestaltung, die viel Platz für die Natur lässt. Ruhe, Privatsphäre und Sicherheit werden ebenfalls gewährleistet.
Kuriose Unterkünfte für einmalige Erfahrungen
Unter Vögeln inBaumkronenschlafen, ist zweifellos eine originelle Erfahrung. Bei denBamhaiser Gaalgebierg, imkommunalen Tierpark vonEsch-sur-Alzettegelegen, handelt es sich um Pfahlbauhütten, die zwischen Eichen, Kastanien, Birken und Ahornen verborgen sind. Drei Häuser mit verschiedenen Themen erwarten Sie:
Alle Hütten verfügen über einen Duschraum mit WC und eine private möblierte Terrasse. Machen Sie sich keine Gedanken um die "Mitbewohner" Maisy, Mia Morilla und Dr. Dachs: es handelt sich um erfundene Charaktere, die von der Escher IllustratorinOlga Reiffgezeichnet wurden, um die kleinen Gäste zu unterhalten.
Haben Sie Lust auf eine Übernachtung in einem "Pilz" am Flussufer? InUseldingenin der Region Guttland wartetPéitche Lauermit drei Pfahlunterkünften in Form vonMushRoomsauf. Diese originellen Unterkünfte erwarten Sie vor allem, wenn Sie Fan des Radtourismus sind: Péitche Lauer wurde mit dem LabelBed & Bikeausgezeichnet; dieses Label gewährleistet unter anderem einen kostenlosen und nachts abgeschlossenen Fahrradabstellraum, Möglichkeiten zum Trocknen Ihrer Kleidung und Ihrer Ausrüstung sowie ein vitamin- und kohlehydratreiches Frühstück. Wenn Sie sich mit einer traditionellen Mahlzeit belohnen möchten, müssen Sie auch nicht wegfahren: dasRestaurantvon Péitche Lauer bietet Ihnen lokale Gerichte in einem entspannten Ambiente.
Seit 1824 treibt ein kleiner Wasserlauf die Räder der Racké-Mühle inEnscheringen(Ösling/Éislek) an. DieRackésmillenist die älteste Wassermühle Luxemburgs, deren Errichtung auf 1334 zurückgeht, obwohl das aktuelle Gebäude aus dem Jahr 1824 stammt. 2003 wurde das ehemaligeWohnhaus des Müllersrenoviert und in eineFerienwohnungmit vier Schlafzimmern, einem Aufenthaltsraum mit Schlafsofas, einer Küche, zwei Duschen, drei Toiletten und einer kleinen Terrasse umgebaut. DieRackésmillengehört zumTourist Center Robbesscheier, das auchZimmer im ehemaligen BauernhofSammeshaffund eine auf Produkten lokaler Hersteller basierendeVerpflegunganbietet.
An der Mosel können Sie einen andersartigen Urlaub in einemrestaurierten mittelalterlichen Turmin der Stadtmauer der Altstadt vonGrevenmacherverbringen. Die Wohnung bietet Platz für bis zu vier Personen, und die Zimmer mit zum Teil halbrunden Räumen sind auf drei Stockwerken verteilt. Also eine originelle und ideale Unterkunft, um dieseWeinbauregionzu erkunden, die sich Kelten, Gallier und Römer zunutze machten, die dort bereits Wein anbauten!
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am06.03.2026
Mehr wissen
Wanderungen (I): Müllerthal und Mosel
Rundwanderwege für Kinder: Natur und Biodiversität für die Kleinsten
Wanderungen (II): Éislek, Guttland und Minett
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/tourismus/entspannung/wellness.html
Wellness: echte Wohlfühlmomente
Sie brauchen nach einem Arbeitstag etwas Entspannung? Sie möchten Ihr Gleichgewicht zwischen Körper und Geist wiederherstellen? Luxemburg verfügt über zahlreiche Wellness-Zentren, in denen Sie Thermalkuren, Momente der Entspannung oder kraftspendende Massagen genießen können. Wir laden Sie ein, je nach Ihren Bedürfnissen aus unserer kleinen Auswahl an Oasen zu wählen.
Bad Mondorf und sein Thermalwasser
Die Geschichte des Thermalbads von Bad Mondorf ist gewissermaßen kurios. Tatsächlich fand die erste Bohrung im 19. Jahrhundert mit dem Ziel, aufgrund der erheblich steigenden Salzpreise in Europa Steinsalz auf luxemburgischem Staatsgebiet zu finden, statt. Das Salz wurde nie gefunden, dafür erwartete die Bohrer aber ein großes Reservoir mit thermomineralem Wasser. Da die ersten beiden Quellen praktisch erschöpft sind, beschert Ihnen heutzutage die Michel-Lucius-Quelle dieWohltaten des Thermalwassers, wenn Sie dasThermalbad Mondorfbesuchen. Sie ist heute dieeinzige Thermalquelle Luxemburgs.
Mit seinem Thermalwasserbecken, elf verschiedenen Saunen, mehreren Hammams, Jacuzzis und Schwimmbädern sowie Wellness-Aufenthalten und medizinischen Kuren, bietet das Bad bietet Momente der Entspannung. Außerdem werden den Besuchern ein Fitness-Bereich, zwei Hotels und drei Restaurants geboten.
Und warum erkunden Sie nicht die RegionMoseloder entdecken sie wieder, sobald Sie mit Abschalten fertig sind?
Wellness im ganzen Land
Wenn Sie in der Hauptstadt oder in der Nähe wohnen, ist dasPidal Spavielleicht eine gute Option für eine Pause. Mit einem Saunabereich und einem Außenbecken bietet diese Anlage inWalferdingenhochwertige Kosmetikbehandlungen und Massagen. Zudem können Sie die Wellnessbehandlungen mit ein paar Sporteinheiten im Fitnessbereich oder im Schwimmbad kombinieren. Sie sehnen sich nach Entspannung in ruhiger Atmossphäre und suchen nach einem individuelleren Angebot? Entdecken Sie die Private SPA Suiten für ein ganz individuelles Erlebnis, sei es allein, als Paar oder unter Freunden.
DasWellnesszentrumderCoqueinKirchbergbietet neben den Entspannungsklassikern wie beispielsweise Saunen mit verschiedenen Temperaturen, einem Hammam und einem Whirlpool, eine Schneekabine, damit Sie bei -14°C die Saunarituale der nordischen Länder eintauchen können.
Nicht weit von Luxemburg-Stadt entfernt befindet sichLes Thermes, ein Erlebnisbad inStrassen, das auch einen Sauna- und Wellnessbereich anbietet.
InMerschbietet dasCentre aquatiqueKrounebiergeinen modernen Wellnessbereich, der mit verschiedenen Saunen, einer Infrarotkabine, einem Hammam, einem Kaltbecken sowie mehreren Whirlpools und 360° Erlebnisduschen ausgestattet ist.
Im Norden des Landes, inHosingen, befindet sichAquanat'Our. Dieses Zentrum bietet ein Erlebnisbad, ein Fitnesszentrum und eine Saunalandschaft mit Hammam, 60°-Sanarium, Kaltbecken und drei Saunaarten.
DasLand der Roten Erdebirgt auch Anlagen zum Abschalten. InDifferdingenverfügtAquasudüber einen Wellnessbereich mit fünf Saunen, einem Dampfbad, einem Kaltbecken und einem Jacuzzi. Für Wasserspaß in der Natur bietet das ErlebnisbadEscher Schwemm–Les bains du parc, zehn Minuten zu Fuß vonEsch an der Alzette, einen Saunabereich mit türkischem Bad, finnischer Sauna und vielem mehr.
Gut zu wissen: Die meisten Wellness-Zentren in Luxemburg öffnen ihre Saunen an einem Tag pro Woche exklusiv für Damen!
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am04.06.2025
Mehr wissen
Parks und Gärten: Natur im Alltag
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Natur und Entdeckung
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/visit/regions/red-rocks.html
Erreur404
Cette page n'existe pas
Veuillez vérifier l'adresse si vous l'avez saisie vous-même. Pour localiser l'information que vous cherchez, vous pouvez faire une recherche :
ou consultez nos articles les plus lus :
Société et culture
Découvrez la société luxembourgeoise avec toutes ses particularités. Ses fêtes et traditions, son histoire, sa culture riche, sa gastronomie et son engagement international.
Vivre
Famille
Education
Qualité de vie
Mobilité
S'installer
Santé et sécurité sociale
Sport
Visiter
Avec cinq régions touristiques, quatre parcs naturels et une offre culturelle multilingue, le Luxembourg offre aux visiteurs un jeu fascinant de contrastes: histoire et modernité, châteaux anciens et architecture contemporaine, lacs et forêts et une capitale cosmopolite au coeur de l’Europe.
Travailler et étudier
L'emploi au Luxembourg
Les études au Luxembourg
Investir
Situé au cœur de l’Europe, le Luxembourg est votre porte d’entrée idéale sur le marché européen. Le Grand-Duché et ses institutions vous proposent toute une gamme de mesures d’aides destinées à assurer un bon départ à votre entreprise..
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/tourismus/entspannung/slow-tourism.html
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Sie möchten eine Woche voller ruhiger Spaziergänge durch unberührte Landschaften organisieren, um sich nach einem langen Arbeitsjahr zu erholen? Sie müssen nach einem Meeting relaxen? Luxemburg ist für seine Dynamik bekannt, lädt aber auch zumSlow Tourism, dem langsamen Tourismus, ein. Traumschlösser, unberührte Natur, Parks in der Stadt und regionale Erzeugnisse nach traditionellen Methoden erwarten Sie im ganzen Land. Das ist die Gelegenheit, um sich nicht nur selbst zu verwöhnen, sondern in einem Rahmen, der zu langen Gesprächen und zu kulturellem Austausch einlädt, auch neue Freunde kennenzulernen!
Slow Tourismim Alltag
Manchmal hindern uns die Sorgen des Alltags daran, die Vorzüge unserer nächsten Umgebung zu erkennen. Dabei sind dieParksder Stadt Luxemburgdie Orte, an denen man perfekt die nötige Ruhe inmitten eines Arbeitstages findet.
DerSommerist die ideale Jahreszeit, um zum Beispiel ein Picknick im Park derVilla Vaubanzu machen. Dort finden Sie auch einen kleinen Strand, an demAktivitäten geboten werden, die man alleine oder mit der Familie durchführen kann. Nehmen Sie an einerYoga-Stunde teil oder schwelgen Sie bei denOpen-Air-KonzertenKlassik am Parkin klassischer Musik
Sie mögenKunst? Dann verbringen Sie Ihre Mittagspause imPark Tony Neumanauf dem Limpertsberg, um zwischen Skulpturen spazieren zu gehen. Sie liebenRosen? DasRousegäertchenim Merl-Parkwird Sie begeistern, genau wiesein Teich, auf demMini-Segelboote dahingleiten. Blicken Sie ihnen hinterher und lassen Sie diese Ruhe auf sich wirken ...
Nach Ihrem Arbeitstag können Sie sich auchvor den Toren von Luxemburg-Stadt erholen. Fahren Sie doch mit dem Busdes öffentlichen Personennahverkehrsin denBambëschoder denGréngewald. So sparen Sie sich den Stress des Autofahrens und können sich schon mal mental auf Ihren ruhigen Spaziergang durch diese Wälder, die größte Waldfläche des Landes, einstellen. Schlagen Sie einen der angebotenen ausgeschildertenWegeein und atmen Sie tief durch, um den nächsten Tag ganz in Ruhe anzugehen.
Mehrere Spa-Zentren und Thermalbäder laden ebenfalls dazu ein, den Tag in absoluter Ruhe ausklingen zu lassen. Sie müssen also nicht weit reisen, um im Alltag einen Gang runter zu schalten!
Guttland, die perfekte Region zum Runterkommen
Die RegionGuttlandbildet zwar das Herz des Landes, ist aber eineOase der Stille und der Ruhe. Vor den Toren der Hauptstadt schlängeln sichhunderte Kilometer Fuß- und Radwegedurch diegut erhaltenen Landschaftenund fördern diesanfte Mobilität. Das historische Erbe ist hier omnipräsent, sei es im Tal der sieben Schlösser, bei den verschiedenen gallo-römischen Stätten oder in den ruralen Museen.
Möchten Sieeine ruhige Zeitreise machen? Dann sollten Sie dasTal der sieben Schlösserdurchwandern. Sie können auch die InitiativeBed+Bikenutzen und mit der Gewissheit durch die Region radeln, dass am Ende des Tages eine schöne Unterkunft auf Sie und Ihr Fahrrad wartet!
Sie sind auf der Suche nach einem Ausflug, der inEinklang mit Ihrem ökologischen Gewissenund Ihrer Unterstützung des Erhalts derbiologischen Vielfaltundregionalen Erzeugnissensteht? Dann besuchen Sie eines der zahlreichen innovativen, nachhaltigen Projekte der Region! DasLändliche Museum Thillenvogteimacht seine Besucher mit dem Leben und der Arbeit auf dem Land in vergangenen Zeiten vertraut. DieMühle von Beckerichbietet Führungen zu den Themen erneuerbare Energien und nachhaltige Entwicklung.
Das vonLuxemburg-Stadt aus mit demöffentlichen Personennahverkehrleicht zu erreichende vielfältige Angebot der Region Guttlanderfreut diejenigen, die auf der Suche nach ruhigen Tourismus sind.
Slow Food, eine Bewegung, die auch in Luxemburg präsent ist
Die Philosophie hinterSlow Foodist die Grundlage für den langsamen Tourismus. DieBewegungentsteht in den 1980er Jahren in Italien und stellt einen klaren Zusammenhang zwischen Genuss, Herkunft der Lebensmittel und ländlichem Leben her. Die heute internationale Bewegung lädt dazu ein, die Lebensrhythmen in harmonischem Einklang mit der Natur zu achten.
Diese Herangehensweise ist auch in Luxemburg präsent. Tatsächlich wurde der VereinSlow Food Luxembourg1999 mit dem Ziel gegründet, die Philosophie und Ziele der internationalen Bewegung in Luxemburg und in der Großregion bekannt zu machen. Es wird eine Vielzahl anAktivitätengeboten: Geschmacksworkshops, Märkte, Kochseminare, Besichtigung von Erzeugern und vieles mehr.
Nehmen Sie sich die Zeit, von denWohltaten einer langsamen Ernährung auf Grundlage langsamen Ernährungauf Grundlageluxemburgischer Erzeugnisse, begleitet vonunseren Weinen und Schaumweinen, zu genießen. Die Dolce Vita erwartet Sie überall in Luxemburg!
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am22.11.2024
Mehr wissen
Parks und Gärten: Natur im Alltag
Wellness: echte Wohlfühlmomente
Natur und Entdeckung
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/tourismus/entspannung/parks-und-garten.html
Parks und Gärten: Natur im Alltag
In Luxemburg hat man es nie weit in die Natur! Egal, ob Sie sich im Stadtzentrum, im Norden, im Süden, im Osten oder im Westen des Großherzogtums befinden, Sie finden immer einen Park oder Garten, in dem Sie der Realität entfliehen oder den Stress des Alltags hinter sich lassen können.
Grünflächen im Stadtzentrum
Luxemburg-Stadt bietet mit seinen Grünflächen, die mehr als ein Viertel der Fläche der Hauptstadt bedecken, die perfekte Mischung aus Business und Entspannung. Wie derCentral Parcin New York ist das Petrusstal Luxemburgs grüne Lunge: grüne Parks, die zu schönen Spaziergängen und Momenten der Ruhe einladen, und das mitten im Stadtzentrum!
Nehmen Sie an einer der vielfältigen Veranstaltungen teil, die das ganze Jahr über im Tal organisiert werden. Die bekanntesten sind: derDKV Urban Trailund die Feierlichkeiten am Vortag des Nationalfeiertags, bei dem junge sowie nicht mehr ganz so junge Menschen zusammenkommen.
Doch das ist nicht der einzige Park, denLuxemburg-Stadtzu bieten hat! Der Stadtpark Edouard André, eine sehr hübsche Grünanlage mit zahlreichen Grünflächen, darunter dieKinnékswiss,lädt zum Relaxen ein. Der Park Merl-Belair, nur wenige Schritte vom Stadtzentrum entfernt, ist gewiss ein bevorzugter Treffpunkt für Familien. Die Kinder können sich auf einem großen Spielplatz austoben, während die Eltern sich auf den Wiesen am Teich oder anderen Gewässern erholen.
Alle Stadtparks der Hauptstadt sind sowohl zu Fuß als auch per Fahrrad zugänglich und laden dazu ein, einen Gang runter zu schalten und in unserer hektischen Welt einen Moment der Ruhe zu genießen.
Entdecken Sie die außergewöhnlichen Gärten des Großherzogtums
Gartenliebhaber aufgepasst! Besuchen Sie denKlouschtergaartzu Füßen des Bockfelsens. Dort können Sie seltene Pflanzenkulturen unserer Regionen entdecken. Ihr Erhalt ist ein Hauptziel des Gartens, der ein ganz besonderes Mikroklima genießt.
Außerhalb der Stadt Luxemburg können Sie in den französischen Gärten aufSchloss Ansemburgbotanische Sammlungen, exotische Pflanzen und zahlreiche Obstbaumsorten bewundern. Ein Besuch imKunstgartenin Wiltz ist sicher einen Umweg wert. In allen Ecken Luxemburgs finden Sie ein umfassendes Angebot an Gärten, die auf Ihren Besuch warten!
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am03.10.2024
Mehr wissen
Slow tourism - Take a walk on the slow side
Wellness: echte Wohlfühlmomente
Natur und Entdeckung
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/quick-fact/foreign-workers.html
Foreign workers
43%
of Luxembourg's workforce comes from across its borders.
In 2021, over
213,000
people from Belgium, France and Germany worked in Luxembourg.
Over
170
nationalities live together in Luxembourg.
The country has a total population of
634,500
people.
National Day is on
23rd June,
on the occasion of the celebrations for the Grand Duke's birthday.
It was celebrated on the very day of the birthday of the sovereign until
23rd January,
but the date was changed due to the weather conditions.
Luxembourg was founded in
963
by Count Siegfried.
The formal independence
only goes back to
1839.
H.R.H. Grand Duke Henri
is the head of state since
2000.
He is the
6th head of state
since the independence of Luxembourg in 1839.
Legislative elections by universal suffrage are held every
5 years.
On this occasion, the population elects another Parliament composed of
60 members
representing their interests.
The initiative
Space Resources
was revealed in
2016.
Luxembourg was the
2nd country in the world
defining a legal framework for
space exploration.
Luxembourg dedicates
1 %
of its GNI
to development cooperation.
Luxembourg's development cooperation is among the
5
most generous contributors in this field.
Luxembourg City's fortress and old city were classified UNESCO World Heritage in
1994.
In 2003, the photographic exhibition
The family of man
became World Document Heritage.
In 2010, the
Echternach Hopping Procession
was included on the list of the Immaterial Cultural Heritage.
84%
of luxembourgish pupils are registered
In public schools.
School careers are made up of
15 years,
including 8 in preschool and primary school, and 7 in secondary school.
Luxembourg is made up of
2
geographical regions: theÉislekin the north and theGuttlandin the south.
Fancy visiting the country?
5 tourist regions
wait to be discovered.
The short animated filmMr Hublotwas awarded the
Oscar
for the best animated short film in
2014.
Luxembourgish pupils learn at least
3 languages
during their schooling.
Furthermore the pupils can
choose between 3 other languages
which they can add.
73%
of residents speak Luxembourgish.
In total,
99%
of the population speaks more than one language.
The Luxembourgers
represent
52,8%
of the population.
The
remaining 47,2%
are foreigners
from 170 different nationalities.
The superannuation calculators
Meluxina
performs 10 petaflops
a second, i.e. 10 million billion operations.
It is part of the Euro HPC network that is composed of
8
european superannuation calculators.
Luxembourg's border is
365km
long.
There are
3 neighbouring countries:
Belgium, Germany and France.
Luxembourg is ranked
2Nd
best  in the world for green finance.
TheLuxembourg Green Exchangeis the
1st
stock exchange in the world that is reservedto green bonds.
Luxembourg is one of the
6
founding members of the European Union.
Prime Minister Joseph Bech signed the Treaties of Rome for Luxembourg in
1957.
4
beautiful nature parks
await you in Luxembourg.
Together, they cover almost
a third
of the national territory.
Luxembourg contributed
12.000
tons of steel for the construction of theOne World Trade Center.
This corresponds to
2 days
of steel industry production in Luxembourg.
Luxembourg hosts the
european capital of culture 3 times
in 1995, 2007 and 2022.
The Luxembourgish city to bear that title in
2022
is Esch-sur-Alzette.
Parental leave can be taken one day per week for a period of
20 months.
In 2020, nearly
11.000
persons benefited from this measure.
In 2020, Luxembourg ranks
2nd among OECD countries
in terms of labour productivity.
On average, GDP per hour worked is
97 euros (in purchasing power parity)
in the Grand Duchy.
Luxembourg ranks
10th
of the Global Social Mobility Index.
According to the World Economic Forum, it takes
2 generations
to reach the median income in the Grand Duchy.
Homosexual marriage was legalised in
2015.
In Luxembourg, some
2,000
couples get married each year in total.
In 2019,
52,000
wine tourists visited the Moselle.
Of Luxembourg's residents,
53%
participated in a wine tasting.
Edward Steichen's "The Bitter Years" exhibition brings together
200
documentary images from the Great Depression in America.
Made for MOMA in New York in,
1962,
it is housed today by the CNA in Dudelange.
Su-Mei Tse wins the "Golden Lion" at the Venice Biennale as the
1st
Luxembourgish artist.
The prize was awarded to her on
14 June 2003
rewarding the best international participation.
Over
70
castles await you in Luxembourg.
They represent over
1,000
years of national history.
The "Schueberfouer" already exists for
680
years.
Each year, this traditional festival attracts
2 million
visitors.
Since 1965, Luxembourg has been
1 of 3
capitals of the European Union.
The other two are
Brussels and Strasbourg.
Luxembourg is the
1st
European country to have defined a framework for sustainability bonds.
The first sustainability bond was over
1.5 billion
euros.
In Luxembourg in 2020
609
photovoltaic installation were implemented.
The PRIMe House aid scheme supports this energy since
2016.
In 2021 Luxembourg is the
1st
country to ban glyphosate.
Already in 2020
99%
of Luxembourg winegrowers no longer use glyphosate.
Since the founding of the European Union
3
Luxembourgers have chaired the European Commission.
That were
Gaston Thorn, Jacques Santer and Jean-Claude Juncker.
Luxembourg has maintained its
AAA
rating in 2022.
Rating agencies DBRS, Fitch and S&P have confirmed the rating
despite the sanitary crisis.
The incubator of the University of Luxemburg was created in
2017
to support the launch of startups.
The 'Ideation Campus' transforms
twice
a year the university into an ideas factory.
In 1985, Luxembourg was one of the
5
signatories of the Schengen agreements.
Today
26
countries are part of the Schengen area.
In 2020, Luxembourg City came
9th
in the 'Global Liveability Report'.
The study evaluates quality of life in over
490
cities worldwide.
As part of heritage conservation,
1,877
buildings are under protection in 2021.
In 2008, only some
700
buildings were protected.
Since
29 February 2020
public transportation has been free in Luxembourg.
Thus, the Grand Duchy is the
1st
European country to enjoy free public transportation.
On 10 May 2020, the Grand Ducal Court announced the birth of
Prince Charles
the first child of the Hereditary Grand-Ducal couple.
The future Grand Duke is the
5th
of the grandchildren of the Grand Duke and the Grand Duchess.
33cl
is the most common beer size in Luxembourg.
It is served in
2
different types of glass: the Mini and the Flûte.
In 1982, the band
Depeche Mode
composed a song about a small village in Luxembourg.
The song
A little town
is about the village of Oberkorn.
Luxembourg is the
2nd
greenest country in the world in 2020.
180
countries were analysed by the Yale University's IPE.
The Luxembourg supercomputer Meluxina is ranked
4th
in the world for its energy efficiency.
In Europe, it is even ranked
1st.
In 2020, the "Gender Pay Gap" is
0,7 %
in Luxembourg.
The gender pay gap is therefore
the smallest
of all EU countries.
Last update20.01.2025
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/key-sectors.html
Key sectors
Key sectors
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/travailler-et-etudier/les-etudes-au-luxembourg/les-universites.html
Higher education institutions
Would you like to study in a multicultural  and multilingual country in the heart of Europe? The University of Luxembourg, known the world over for its multilingualism, its international outlook and its research programmes, welcomes a good number of students both from the Grand Duchy and abroad. In addition, accredited private foreign higher education institutions offer a wide range of courses and degrees for all needs. Not only is there a diverse selection  of higher education institutions in the country, but the cultural and social environment will make you enjoy your student life to the fullest.
The University of Luxembourg
The University' s teaching featuresthe availability of an abundance of high-qualityprogrammes. Welcome to the rooms of theUniversity of Luxembourg. Created in 2003, it is the only public university in the Grand Duchy. It consists of three faculties:
By participating in the  U-Multirank, Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) andTimes Higher Education (THE)rankings, where it obtains excellent scores in terms of international prospects and ranks 25th in the Young Universities Ranking of universities under 50, the University of Luxembourg has made its reputation.
3 interdisciplinary centres
The university also offers three interdisciplinary centres:
A European university
The University of Luxembourgis European through and through: located at the heart of the European Union, it is by nature multilingual and international (50% of students are from outside  the Grand Duchy). The programmes are eitherbi- or trilingual(French, German, English) or entirely held in English. Moreover, some bachelor and master programmes are bi- or even tri-national, involving neighbouring countries.
The popularity of the fledgling university is based onresearch- especially in its priority research areas of materials science, computer science and computer security, European and international law, finance and financial innovation, education and digital and contemporary history. The transdisciplinary themes of health and systems biomedicine as well as data modelling and simulation are also specialities of the university. Moreover,close collaboration with the country's financial institutionsand companies enables students to immerse themselves in the professional sector from the very beginning of their studies.
Foreign and private higher education institutions
Apart from the University of Luxembourg, there are alsoprivate foreign specialised higher education institutionsin the country. Here is the list of institutionsaccredited by the Ministry of Higher Education and Research  (awarding national degrees);
Institutions awarding foreign diplomas
BTS - higher technician certificates
It should also be noted that there are shorthigher education courses, the  BTS(brevets de technicien supérieur), offered by public high schools (duration between 2 and 3 years, 120 to 180 ECTS credits). The BTS are primarily aimed at young people who want to obtain higher level professional qualifications in a given speciality in order to be better prepared for the labour market. You can find the complete offer of the BTS atwww.bts.lu.
Here are some examples:
Last update10.03.2025
For more information
Financial aids for students: everything about grants and scholarships
Student accommodation
Student life in Luxembourg: the essentials
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/living/mobility/top-5-velo-luxembourg.html
Erreur404
Cette page n'existe pas
Veuillez vérifier l'adresse si vous l'avez saisie vous-même. Pour localiser l'information que vous cherchez, vous pouvez faire une recherche :
ou consultez nos articles les plus lus :
Société et culture
Découvrez la société luxembourgeoise avec toutes ses particularités. Ses fêtes et traditions, son histoire, sa culture riche, sa gastronomie et son engagement international.
Vivre
Famille
Education
Qualité de vie
Mobilité
S'installer
Santé et sécurité sociale
Sport
Visiter
Avec cinq régions touristiques, quatre parcs naturels et une offre culturelle multilingue, le Luxembourg offre aux visiteurs un jeu fascinant de contrastes: histoire et modernité, châteaux anciens et architecture contemporaine, lacs et forêts et une capitale cosmopolite au coeur de l’Europe.
Travailler et étudier
L'emploi au Luxembourg
Les études au Luxembourg
Investir
Situé au cœur de l’Europe, le Luxembourg est votre porte d’entrée idéale sur le marché européen. Le Grand-Duché et ses institutions vous proposent toute une gamme de mesures d’aides destinées à assurer un bon départ à votre entreprise..
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/publications/how-to-set-up-a-business.html
How to set up a business in Luxembourg
How to set up a business in Luxembourg
Last update24.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/invest/competitiveness.html
Competitiveness
Competitiveness
Last update21.10.2024
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/fr/investir/innovation/environnement-technologique.html
Environnement technologique
Le Luxembourg offre un environnement technologique idéal pour les leaders de l'innovation et les entreprises en pleine croissance. Bâti sur des piliers tels que la sécurité et la fiabilité, également réputé pour son excellente connectivité, le Grand-Duché affiche une infrastructure numérique de pointe en constante évolution. Découvrez différentes parties de la colonne vertébrale numérique du pays et comment celles-ci aident les partenaires nationaux et internationaux à prospérer.
Un élève modèle à la frontière du numérique et de l'infrastructure TIC de l'UE
Classé parmi les meilleurs performeurs de l'UE en matière d'infrastructure numérique, selon lerapport sur l'état d'avancement de la décennie numérique (Report on the state of the Digital Decade),le Luxembourg se présente comme un contributeur précieux aux objectifs de la décennie numérique de l'Europe. À travers une expansion et des améliorations constantes de son infrastructure à haut débit, associé à un puissant écosystème de calcul haute performance (HPC) et une excellente couverture 5G, le Grand-Duché montre son engagement pour atteindre l'excellence en matière d'innovation.
En effet, à l'heure actuelle, le bon fonctionnement des entreprises dépend fortement des technologies de l'information et de la communication (TIC). Un réseau bien développé peut donc influencer énormément son succès et sa croissance. S'appuyant sur une infrastructure numérique d'avant-garde,lesecteur des TIC luxembourgeoisrassemble les acteurs clé des TIC du pays pour cultiver des opportunités intersectorielles, faciliter la croissance des entreprises et encourager la collaboration entre les entreprises et les institutions de recherche.
Puissant ensemble: les HPC du Luxembourg
Découvrez le supercalculateur le plus puissant du Luxembourg:MeluXina. Lors de son lancement en 2021 par leEuropean High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (EuroHPC JU)où il a gagné une place parmi le top 50 des superordinateurs au monde, il a été nommé en référence à Mélusine, la sirène mythique issue de l'une des légendes fondatrices du pays. Un nom bien à propos puisque MeluXina est refroidi à l'eau et sert de pierre angulaire dans l'écosystème numérique national.
Sa puissance informatique permet aussi bien aux entreprises publiques que privées, ainsi qu'aux organismes de recherche, d'accéder à un grand nombre de services dans divers domainestels que la climatologie, l'ingénierie, l'aéronautique, le design automobile, la production d'énergie, la médecine ou l'analyse financière. Ainsi, en 2023, le Luxembourg a lancé unprogramme de master en calcul haute performancepour former les futures générations de spécialistes HPC nationaux et européens.
MeluXina - Luxembourg's Supercomputer (Vidéo YouTube)
Le réseau de centres de données nouvelle génération le plus dense d'Europe
Outre la puissance informatique pure et dure,la sécurité et la confiance sont les qualités principales de la stratégie de développement des TIC au Luxembourg. C'est pourquoi trois de ses 16 centres de données modernes sont certifiésTierIV, ce qui prouve leur adhésion aux normes les plus élevées du secteur en matière de fiabilité et d'efficacité.Ce réseau national se caractérise par la plus forte densité de centres de donnéesTierIV d'Europe. Avec des fournisseurs de data centre flexibles commeLuxConnect,ebrcouDATA4, le Grand-Duché offre une large gamme de services aussi bien pour les start-ups TIC que pour les multinationales.
Connectivité: un maillon fort de la chaîne
La connectivité est une composante vitale pour établir un environnement TIC fiable. Situé au cœur de l'Europe,le Luxembourg est étroitement connecté à un réseau de fibre international qui en fait un pôle de latence très basse. Avec unestratégie de transmission à très haut débitbien définie, son réseau national très grande capacité (VHCN) et sa couverture 5G ne cessent d'augmenter,dépassant continuellement la couverture moyenne européenne.
Forte de son infrastructure généralisée en fibre optique qui couvre les trois-quarts des foyers,le Luxembourg se situe dans le top 30% du haut-débit en Europe. À côté de son réseau de fibre active, le Grand-Duché héberge quelques réseaux de fibre noire. Ces réseaux dormants font office d'infrastructure critique pour optimiser les télécommunications et la connectivité Internet du pays et satisfaire la demande croissante de services de transmission de données ultrarapide.
La technologie au service de la croissance: collaborateurs nationaux
Voici trois des nombreux acteurs dans cet environnement numérique entrelacé:
Research Luxembourgcompte de nombreux acteurs dans le domaine de la recherche publique. Par exemple, leLuxembourg Institute of Health(LIH), leLuxembourg Institute of Science and Technology(LIST) et l'Université du Luxembourg (Uni.lu), pour ne citer qu'eux.
Dans le domaine de la recherche, l'infrastructure numérique nationale facilite l'échange de données tout en maintenant un haut niveau de sécurité et de confidentialité sur les informations sensibles concernant la recherche. En outre, l'accès aux supercalculateurs comme MeluXina, AION (Uni.lu) ou le HPC du LIST soutient des projets de recherche dans différents domaines et permet à ceux-ci de s'attaquer à des problématiques de calcul complexes.
SES est l'un des premiers opérateurs satellites au monde. Son siège est basé au Grand-Duché. Encollaboration avec des institutions nationales telles que le LIST, ils utilisent et construisent une infrastructure numérique au Luxembourg pour gérer l'innovation et façonner l'avenir du pays.
En tant que pôle dédié à la collaboration fintech, le LhoFT exploite la connectivité et les TIC du Luxembourg pour connecter les start-ups, les institutions financières et les organes de régulation. Il sert de tremplin à la mise en réseau pour les petites entreprises et a pour objectif de soutenir leur croissance dans l'écosystème fintech.
Dernière modification le20.05.2025
Pour en savoir plus
TIC nationales
MeluXina - Le HPC luxembourgeois
Recherche et innovation
Pied de page
Abonnez-vous à notre newsletter
Les champs marqués d’une étoile (*) sontobligatoires.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/investir/secteurs-cles/ict.html
Information and communication technologies
Digitalisation goes hand in hand with opportunities and challenges. Aware of the potential of a timely and suitable technology, infrastructure and regulation, the Luxembourg government has placed digitalisation and information and communication technologies (ICT) at the heart of its concerns. In order to remain competitive at international level, the Grand Duchy pushes the development of digital infrastructures further.
Digital pioneer
Today, Luxembourgis already a prime location for companies from the ICT sector, which value guidance and modern infrastructures. But in order to remain competitive at international level, the Grand Duchy prioritises the development of its digital infrastructures. Artificial intelligence, 5G or setting up high performance computers (HPC) areat the very heart of Luxembourg's strategy.
Luxembourg's efforts are continuously recognised by international benchmarks. TheDigital Economy & Society Indexof the European Commission, which assesses the evolution of EU member states towards a digital economy and society, ranked Luxembourg in 6th position. In particular, the index notes the Grand Duchy's performances in the field of the adoption of fixed and mobile broadband. In terms of the information society,the ITUranked Luxembourg 9th in theworld.
Artificial intelligence
In a digital world filled with data, artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to revolutionise human life like few other technologies did before. This is whyLuxembourg got into artificial intelligence to become one of the most developed digital societies.The strategic vision of Luxembourg's IA is based on the country's ambition to position itself as a pioneer in the digital field.
Luxembourg is determined to play its role as forerunner, Luxembourg being the first European country that established a public-private partnership on AI with the company NVIDIA. This joint research laboratory means that there is a close collaboration between various members of the Luxembourg scientific community, including, in particular, the High-Performance Calculation Centre of the University of Luxembourg,the Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, the Interdisciplinary Centre for Security, Reliability and Trust and theLuxembourg Institute of Science and Technology, and NVIDIA, a company employing some of the best computer scientists in the world.
The data economy
Luxembourg has published astrategy on the economy of datadataand is in the process of establishing a high-performance computer(HPC)accessibleto economic and research key players. The HPC Competence Centre will not only act as a catalyst by promoting data governance, but will also make anonymisation and pseudonymisation services available, as well as access, location and data sale plarforms.
Moreover, the government has recognised the need for a nourishing  data ecosystem and has created theLuxembourg National Data Service (LNDS), an economic interest group,to implement Luxembourg’s strategies in research, innovation, and digitalisation. LNDS enables value creation from secondary use of data, for public and private partners and supports the sharing and re-use of public sector data, in a trustable manner.
The LNDS service portfolio includes know-how, capabilities, tools, infrastructure, and data services. The services are developed together with data partners, through concrete data projects. Through efficient & responsible use of data and improving the secondary use of data, LNDS will support the acceleration of economic, ecological, and societal transitions.
Cybersecurity
Luxembourg thinks of information security as a major factor of economic attractiveness. Luxembourg is 11th in the world on theGlobal Cybersecurity Index, and is the promoter of many collaborative projects in this field. Luxembourg promotes informed governance by harmonising the requirement rules of regulators to reduce compliance costs. State actors provide objective case scenarios and metrics to carry out comparative risk analysis and work closely with the cyber insurance sector. Luxembourg's cybersecurity ecosystem is mature and welcomes the confidence shown by the Luxembourgish economy and beyond.
Luxembourg ICT Cluster (Video/Audio YouTube)
Luxembourg ICT Cluster
Digital Luxembourg - where innovation is contagious (Video/Audio YouTube)
Digital Luxembourg - where innovation is contagious
Last update29.04.2025
For more information
Technological environment
Health technologies: a thriving and innovative sector
Start-up Luxembourg: your unique portal to the start-up ecosystem
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/sproch-vun-der-woch/2020/kaffiskichelchen.html
Sproch vun der Woch
Kaffiskichelchen
Pastry (literally: coffee biscuit)
Sweet bakery product which is popular at Luxembourg'sKaffisdëscher(i.e. breakfast tables). You might also come across this being calledMëtsch. Also very much appreciated by colleagues at the office."Wëlls de e Kaffiskichelchen?"
Sweet bakery product which is popular at Luxembourg'sKaffisdëscher(i.e. breakfast tables). You might also come across this being calledMëtsch. Also very much appreciated by colleagues at the office.
"Wëlls de e Kaffiskichelchen?"
Sproch vun der Woch
To reprimand somebody (Literally: I'm going to straighten his semaphore)
Perhaps the result of the importance of Luxembourg's railroads in the 20th century, this expression is used when you are displeased with somebody and wish to talk to them about it."Wat erlaabt dee sech? Ech ginn deem emol den Diks riichten!"
Perhaps the result of the importance of Luxembourg's railroads in the 20th century, this expression is used when you are displeased with somebody and wish to talk to them about it.
"Wat erlaabt dee sech? Ech ginn deem emol den Diks riichten!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Delighted
Enchantéiertis a Luxembourgish adaptation of the French wordEnchantéand means exactly the same thing: a polite greeting, usually when being presented to a person for the first time."Ech mengen, mir kennen eis nach net. Enchantéiert!"
Enchantéiertis a Luxembourgish adaptation of the French wordEnchantéand means exactly the same thing: a polite greeting, usually when being presented to a person for the first time.
"Ech mengen, mir kennen eis nach net. Enchantéiert!"
Sproch vun der Woch
To scold somebody
This expression cannot really be translated into any other language: it as about scolding somebody 'Schëmmel', which is a white horse, and 'Bless', which is the Luxembourgish word for a white spot that horses or cows my have on their head."En hat eng ganz Palett fale gelooss a gouf vum Viraarbechter Schëmmel a Bless vernannt."
This expression cannot really be translated into any other language: it as about scolding somebody 'Schëmmel', which is a white horse, and 'Bless', which is the Luxembourgish word for a white spot that horses or cows my have on their head.
"En hat eng ganz Palett fale gelooss a gouf vum Viraarbechter Schëmmel a Bless vernannt."
Sproch vun der Woch
May wreath
1 May custom which consists in the weaving of young twigs and their leaves to wreaths. These are then hung up on houses and buildings aslucky charms. This also inaugurates theMaitrankseason, a very popular beverage in Luxembourg and the region around the Belgian town of Arlon, which is made of white wine and sweet-scented bedstraw. And which, by the way, should be consumed moderately."D'Musek geet muer den Owend an de Bësch fir de Meekranz ze maachen."
1 May custom which consists in the weaving of young twigs and their leaves to wreaths. These are then hung up on houses and buildings aslucky charms. This also inaugurates theMaitrankseason, a very popular beverage in Luxembourg and the region around the Belgian town of Arlon, which is made of white wine and sweet-scented bedstraw. And which, by the way, should be consumed moderately.
"D'Musek geet muer den Owend an de Bësch fir de Meekranz ze maachen."
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: Don't break your watch
Expression which can either be used to tell somebody to ease the pressure, or to ironically tell somebody that they are not pulling their weight."Méchs du schonn nees Paus? Briech der d'Auer net!"
Expression which can either be used to tell somebody to ease the pressure, or to ironically tell somebody that they are not pulling their weight.
"Méchs du schonn nees Paus? Briech der d'Auer net!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Easter eggs
Widely known tradition in Europe and abroad. According to legend, the Easter Bunny hides the painted eggs (as well as presents) during the night in the garden, so that the children can search for them on Easter morning. Funny affair which demands some level of planning, if you don't want to find some too well hidden eggs at the end of the garden season. And no, the three 'e' are not a typo."Sot Kanner, waart dir schonn d'Ouschtereeër sichen?"
Widely known tradition in Europe and abroad. According to legend, the Easter Bunny hides the painted eggs (as well as presents) during the night in the garden, so that the children can search for them on Easter morning. Funny affair which demands some level of planning, if you don't want to find some too well hidden eggs at the end of the garden season. And no, the three 'e' are not a typo.
"Sot Kanner, waart dir schonn d'Ouschtereeër sichen?"
Sproch vun der Woch
Closing time/End of workday (literally: eve before a holiday)
Used at the end of a long workday to indicate that it's time to head home. Can also be used as an expression of being fed up with something:"Elo ass awer Feierowend hei!"
Used at the end of a long workday to indicate that it's time to head home. Can also be used as an expression of being fed up with something:
"Elo ass awer Feierowend hei!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Being mischievous (literally: to have nothing good in your head)
Is said of somebody who has a reputation for being naughty."Deen huet keng Gutt an der Kopp, dee mécht nëmmen Dommheeten."
Is said of somebody who has a reputation for being naughty.
"Deen huet keng Gutt an der Kopp, dee mécht nëmmen Dommheeten."
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: When the mice have eaten well, the flour is bitter
Used to indicate that a person fails to appreciate something because he or she lives in abundance.
Used to indicate that a person fails to appreciate something because he or she lives in abundance.
Sproch vun der Woch
To chat
Art of turning a spontaneous meeting into a pleasant exchange of information. The word is also being used to describe the sound of chimney fire."Am Uewe potert d'Feier, de Wanter jot ëm d'Haus ..."(Luxembourgish song)
Art of turning a spontaneous meeting into a pleasant exchange of information. The word is also being used to describe the sound of chimney fire.
"Am Uewe potert d'Feier, de Wanter jot ëm d'Haus ..."(Luxembourgish song)
Sproch vun der Woch
Happy New Year!
Luxembourgish expression with which people welcome each other in the new year. According to the original expression you also wish someone a wig made of goat hair. The origins of that part of the New Year's greeting lie, luckily perhaps, hidden in the fogs of Luxembourg's history of language and customs."Iech alleguer vill Gléck am neie Joer!"
Luxembourgish expression with which people welcome each other in the new year. According to the original expression you also wish someone a wig made of goat hair. The origins of that part of the New Year's greeting lie, luckily perhaps, hidden in the fogs of Luxembourg's history of language and customs.
"Iech alleguer vill Gléck am neie Joer!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Beauty knows no pain (literally: pride suffers violence)
This expression confirms: the quest for beauty comes at a price."Dee brauch eng Stonn moies fir sech fäerdeg ze maachen. Tjo, Houfert leit Gewalt!"
This expression confirms: the quest for beauty comes at a price.
"Dee brauch eng Stonn moies fir sech fäerdeg ze maachen. Tjo, Houfert leit Gewalt!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Happy Holidays!
The editorial team of the portal Luxembourg.lu wishes you a merry Christmas and happy holidays!"Schéi Feierdeeg an e gudde Rutsch!"
The editorial team of the portal Luxembourg.lu wishes you a merry Christmas and happy holidays!
"Schéi Feierdeeg an e gudde Rutsch!"
Sproch vun der Woch
I love you - the most beautiful way to declare your feelings
When did you last say this to your loved one? Say it in Luxembourgish or add it to your SMS: the abbraviation EHDG is well-known in Luxembourg."Ech soen dir dat vill ze sielen: ech hunn dech gär."
When did you last say this to your loved one? Say it in Luxembourgish or add it to your SMS: the abbraviation EHDG is well-known in Luxembourg.
"Ech soen dir dat vill ze sielen: ech hunn dech gär."
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: To have been hit by a peel
A peel, used to slide bread into an oven, is a remarkable tool, especially when someone hits you with one, e.g. over the head. This in turn might then explain some goofy decisionmaking or downright nonsense someone has made - according to this Luxembourgish expression."Deen huet eng mat der Broutschéiss - deen deet am Schnéi Sandalen un."
A peel, used to slide bread into an oven, is a remarkable tool, especially when someone hits you with one, e.g. over the head. This in turn might then explain some goofy decisionmaking or downright nonsense someone has made - according to this Luxembourgish expression.
"Deen huet eng mat der Broutschéiss - deen deet am Schnéi Sandalen un."
Sproch vun der Woch
Hedgehog
Small animal which can often be found in gardens.
Small animal which can often be found in gardens.
Sproch vun der Woch
Door handle and measure for a glass of Luxembourg beer
Can be ordered at a locksmith or in a cafe. In the former case it opens doors, in the latter it quells thirst with half a litre of beer (roughly a pint). The name is derived from the fact that traditionalKlensch-glasses has a tin cap which had to be opened before drinking. Today, aHumpenis more commonly ordered. It you want to order one, always use the word in conjunction withWann ech gelift(Please):"Eng Klensch wann ech gelift! A fir mäi Kolleg och eng."
Can be ordered at a locksmith or in a cafe. In the former case it opens doors, in the latter it quells thirst with half a litre of beer (roughly a pint). The name is derived from the fact that traditionalKlensch-glasses has a tin cap which had to be opened before drinking. Today, aHumpenis more commonly ordered. It you want to order one, always use the word in conjunction withWann ech gelift(Please):
"Eng Klensch wann ech gelift! A fir mäi Kolleg och eng."
Sproch vun der Woch
An insufficient quantity
Literally: Something for the hollow tooth. Expression used if something is not present in sufficient quantity to have an impact (i.e. money, food, etc.). Also used in a figurative sense, e.g. in case of insufficient effort to achieve something."Dovu ginn ech net sat, dat war eppes fir den huelen Zant."
Literally: Something for the hollow tooth. Expression used if something is not present in sufficient quantity to have an impact (i.e. money, food, etc.). Also used in a figurative sense, e.g. in case of insufficient effort to achieve something.
"Dovu ginn ech net sat, dat war eppes fir den huelen Zant."
Sproch vun der Woch
Weak, poorly, mediocre
Word to express your dissatisfaction with a person, a situation or a performance. Can also be used if you're feeling poorly."Hatt fillt sech schappeg haut."
Word to express your dissatisfaction with a person, a situation or a performance. Can also be used if you're feeling poorly.
"Hatt fillt sech schappeg haut."
Sproch vun der Woch
What's up?
An expression which you almost certainly will have heard if you have Luxembourgish friends or colleagues. It is used to kick off a conversation, to change the topic, or simply to say 'Hello!'"A soss, wéi geet et?"
An expression which you almost certainly will have heard if you have Luxembourgish friends or colleagues. It is used to kick off a conversation, to change the topic, or simply to say 'Hello!'
"A soss, wéi geet et?"
Sproch vun der Woch
To criticise or complain
Activity that consists of criticising what one could not do better oneself. Preferably used for people (Kregéilerthen) who warm up quickly and start to grumble."Lauschter deem Kregéiler einfach net no."
Activity that consists of criticising what one could not do better oneself. Preferably used for people (Kregéilerthen) who warm up quickly and start to grumble.
"Lauschter deem Kregéiler einfach net no."
Sproch vun der Woch
To put your oar in / to put in your penny's worth
Literally: to add your grain of pepper. Oars, pennies or pepper? This expression is used in Luxembourgish to designate somebody's unsolicited participation in a discussion."Also, wann ech mäi Pefferkär emol kéint dobäi leeën, ..."
Literally: to add your grain of pepper. Oars, pennies or pepper? This expression is used in Luxembourgish to designate somebody's unsolicited participation in a discussion.
"Also, wann ech mäi Pefferkär emol kéint dobäi leeën, ..."
Sproch vun der Woch
Person who is dressed up for Carnival
During the Carnival period, from 2 February until Ash Wednesday, you'll be able to see quite a lot of them. Dressed up for the occasion, their natural habitat will be in or around the numerous festival halls in the countryside where masked balls take place, or on one of thelarge parades which take place each year.
During the Carnival period, from 2 February until Ash Wednesday, you'll be able to see quite a lot of them. Dressed up for the occasion, their natural habitat will be in or around the numerous festival halls in the countryside where masked balls take place, or on one of thelarge parades which take place each year.
Sproch vun der Woch
'I love you' - the most beautiful declaration of love
When did you last tell someone you loved them? This is the best way to express your feelings. In SMS, this expression is usually abbreviated EHDG. You can also use DK for 'Décke Kuss' (big kiss).
When did you last tell someone you loved them? This is the best way to express your feelings. In SMS, this expression is usually abbreviated EHDG. You can also use DK for 'Décke Kuss' (big kiss).
Sproch vun der Woch
Traditional Luxembourgish evening get-together
In the past, as the nights became longer and colder, the neighbourhood would meet at someone's place in the evening, in order to sing songs, tell stories, do some knitting or eat a bite together. That way the community spirit was strenghthened, and candles and firewood were being saved."Kënns de den Owend op eis Uucht?"
In the past, as the nights became longer and colder, the neighbourhood would meet at someone's place in the evening, in order to sing songs, tell stories, do some knitting or eat a bite together. That way the community spirit was strenghthened, and candles and firewood were being saved.
"Kënns de den Owend op eis Uucht?"
Sproch vun der Woch
Cool! (literally: thick gas)
Here's an expression you certainly won't find outside Luxembourg's borders. Even though it is in direct competition with the universally-used 'cool', 'Décke Gas' remains an expression you will (hopefully) hear regularly."Ass denëffentlechen Transport elo gratis? Décke Gas!"
Here's an expression you certainly won't find outside Luxembourg's borders. Even though it is in direct competition with the universally-used 'cool', 'Décke Gas' remains an expression you will (hopefully) hear regularly.
"Ass denëffentlechen Transport elo gratis? Décke Gas!"
Sproch vun der Woch
Inhabitant of Luxembourg's southern region, the 'Minett'
Luxembourg's South, rich with iron ore, was the country's centre for steel production until some time ago. The steelmill workers and inhabitants of that part of the country were thus called 'Minettsdapp'. Even though this was a derogatory term at first, it came to be adopted by the people from that region and is today born with pride."Minettsdäpp sivun der Long op d'Zong."
Luxembourg's South, rich with iron ore, was the country's centre for steel production until some time ago. The steelmill workers and inhabitants of that part of the country were thus called 'Minettsdapp'. Even though this was a derogatory term at first, it came to be adopted by the people from that region and is today born with pride.
"Minettsdäpp sivun der Long op d'Zong."
Sproch vun der Woch
This does not bother me in the slightest
Expression used to indicate that you are not impacted by something or simply do not care."Dat do pickt mech kee Meter!"
Expression used to indicate that you are not impacted by something or simply do not care.
"Dat do pickt mech kee Meter!"
Sproch vun der Woch
To wear one's heart on one's sleeve (literally: from the lung to the tongue)
Human property which consists in speaking one's mind freely, without letting other opinions interfere too much."Hatt ass vun der Long op d'Zong."
Human property which consists in speaking one's mind freely, without letting other opinions interfere too much.
"Hatt ass vun der Long op d'Zong."
Sproch vun der Woch
Common chaffinch
Small bird of around 14 to 18 cm length, very widespread in Europe. As a migratory bird, it returns from warmer regions towards the end of March, and is recognisable due to its singular song. In his poem 'D'Margréitchen' (The Daisy) Luxembourg poet Michel Lentz gives the chaffinch the role of proclaimer of spring.Héiers de de Poufank? Et gëtt Fréijoer.
Small bird of around 14 to 18 cm length, very widespread in Europe. As a migratory bird, it returns from warmer regions towards the end of March, and is recognisable due to its singular song. In his poem 'D'Margréitchen' (The Daisy) Luxembourg poet Michel Lentz gives the chaffinch the role of proclaimer of spring.
Héiers de de Poufank? Et gëtt Fréijoer.
Sproch vun der Woch
Thanks, bye
An expression you will certainly find useful in your daily life.Äddi a merci!
An expression you will certainly find useful in your daily life.
Äddi a merci!
Sproch vun der Woch
Easter Bunny
According to legend, this rabbit hides painted eggs on Easter morning, so that the children can go and find them. The hare also symbolises fertility, renewal and spring. Curious? Then discover moreLuxembourgish traditions surrounding Easter.Den Ouschterhues kënnt geschwënn d'Eeër verstoppen.
According to legend, this rabbit hides painted eggs on Easter morning, so that the children can go and find them. The hare also symbolises fertility, renewal and spring. Curious? Then discover moreLuxembourgish traditions surrounding Easter.
Den Ouschterhues kënnt geschwënn d'Eeër verstoppen.
Sproch vun der Woch
Stop talking rubbish
Literally: don't talk curd. The curd is the physical state of milk after coagulation, one step in the production of cheese. In this Luxembourgish expression it is synonymous to meaningless talk.Dat kann dach net stëmmen. Schwätz kee Brach!
Literally: don't talk curd. The curd is the physical state of milk after coagulation, one step in the production of cheese. In this Luxembourgish expression it is synonymous to meaningless talk.
Dat kann dach net stëmmen. Schwätz kee Brach!
Sproch vun der Woch
Till the cows come home
Literally: Liquorice Day. If somebody tells you to wait tillMokuchsdag, you can safely assume that it's never going to happen.Do kanns de bis Mokuchsdag waarden.
Literally: Liquorice Day. If somebody tells you to wait tillMokuchsdag, you can safely assume that it's never going to happen.
Do kanns de bis Mokuchsdag waarden.
Sproch vun der Woch
To have a chat
Pastime which consists in exchanging information about a multitude of topics informally and in a relaxed manner.Mir haten eis laang net gesinn an hunn dunn emol eng Kosettchen gehalen.
Pastime which consists in exchanging information about a multitude of topics informally and in a relaxed manner.
Mir haten eis laang net gesinn an hunn dunn emol eng Kosettchen gehalen.
Sproch vun der Woch
Though the years may pass, stupidity remains
Used to express your despair over a person who continually repeats the same mistakes or exhibits the same irritating character traits, usually over a lengthy amount of time.Dee léiert och näischt bäi. Tjo, d'Joere ginn, den Eefalt bleift.
Used to express your despair over a person who continually repeats the same mistakes or exhibits the same irritating character traits, usually over a lengthy amount of time.
Dee léiert och näischt bäi. Tjo, d'Joere ginn, den Eefalt bleift.
Sproch vun der Woch
He's arguing like a lawyer
Can be said of someone who can argue pretty well, even though he or she might not always be on the side of the truth.Gleef ëm net ëmmer alles, deen deedegt wéi en Affekot.
Can be said of someone who can argue pretty well, even though he or she might not always be on the side of the truth.
Gleef ëm net ëmmer alles, deen deedegt wéi en Affekot.
Sproch vun der Woch
Don't be such a miser
TheKuuschtis the crust of a bread - if someone iskuuschteg, he or she is a miser.Hatt ass nach ze kuuschteg fir sech sat z'iessen.
TheKuuschtis the crust of a bread - if someone iskuuschteg, he or she is a miser.
Hatt ass nach ze kuuschteg fir sech sat z'iessen.
Sproch vun der Woch
Hopping (or Dancing) Procession
On every Pentacost Tuesday, this procession, part of Unesoc's list of Intangible Cultural Heritage, advances through the abbey-town of Echternach, accompanied by the sounds of marching bands. A must for every visitor!Bass de en Dënschdeg och nees op der Sprangprëssessioun?
On every Pentacost Tuesday, this procession, part of Unesoc's list of Intangible Cultural Heritage, advances through the abbey-town of Echternach, accompanied by the sounds of marching bands. A must for every visitor!
Bass de en Dënschdeg och nees op der Sprangprëssessioun?
Sproch vun der Woch
Not to be taken for a ride
Literally: not to have been picked off a hedge. Fitting answer when you are not to be taken for a ride by someone.Ziel mir kee Blödsinn, ech si jo awer net vun der Heck gepléckt.
Literally: not to have been picked off a hedge. Fitting answer when you are not to be taken for a ride by someone.
Ziel mir kee Blödsinn, ech si jo awer net vun der Heck gepléckt.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: the Stay-at-home-cart
When you're travelling by stay-at-home-cart, you prefer to stay at home during the holidays, which by all means includes exploration ofof your own regionto discover some touristic gems. At least you won't have to plan long journeys or lose time in queues at the airport or traffic jams on the motorways- Fuert dir an d'Vakanz?- Mir fueren dëst Joer mat der Heibleifskäerchen.
When you're travelling by stay-at-home-cart, you prefer to stay at home during the holidays, which by all means includes exploration ofof your own regionto discover some touristic gems. At least you won't have to plan long journeys or lose time in queues at the airport or traffic jams on the motorways
- Fuert dir an d'Vakanz?
- Mir fueren dëst Joer mat der Heibleifskäerchen.
Sproch vun der Woch
To go berserk (literally: to jump out of the box)
Etwas ärgert Sie dermaßen, dass Sie aus der Haut fahren könnten? In dem Fall springen Luxemburger aus der Kiste.Wann dee sech net packt, da sprangen ech geschwënn aus der Këscht.
Etwas ärgert Sie dermaßen, dass Sie aus der Haut fahren könnten? In dem Fall springen Luxemburger aus der Kiste.
Wann dee sech net packt, da sprangen ech geschwënn aus der Këscht.
Sproch vun der Woch
Construction/roadwork site
You'll find them on Luxembourg's roads in many forms. Small or big, mobile or lasting for months, or even years, they are important for trafic management and shape how we move tomorrow. Luxembourg word which has been taken over from the French wordChantier. The plural form isSchantercher.T'ass ewell ee Schantjen um aneren hei.
You'll find them on Luxembourg's roads in many forms. Small or big, mobile or lasting for months, or even years, they are important for trafic management and shape how we move tomorrow. Luxembourg word which has been taken over from the French wordChantier. The plural form isSchantercher.
T'ass ewell ee Schantjen um aneren hei.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: My legs are made of aspic!
'Jelli' is a local product, but not used here in the sense of a culinary specialty. Instead an expression used to describe the feeling in one's legs after a long biking tour, for example through theLuxembourg Ardennes.De ganzen Dag um Vëlo - wat hunn ech d'Been am Jelli!
'Jelli' is a local product, but not used here in the sense of a culinary specialty. Instead an expression used to describe the feeling in one's legs after a long biking tour, for example through theLuxembourg Ardennes.
De ganzen Dag um Vëlo - wat hunn ech d'Been am Jelli!
Sproch vun der Woch
A hopeless case (literally: a bird for the cat)
Expression being normally used for someone who is impervious to any kind of advice.Looss e sinn, dat ass e Vull fir d'Kaz.
Expression being normally used for someone who is impervious to any kind of advice.
Looss e sinn, dat ass e Vull fir d'Kaz.
Sproch vun der Woch
Switching from one topic to the next
Having to listen to someone speak while constantly switching topics can be taxing one's patience indeed. The Luxembourgish expression is composed from the words 'Hëppches', meaning 'hopscotch', and 'Haapches' meaning 'everybody'.Wann hatt schwätzt, da kënnt et vun Hëppches op Haapches.
Having to listen to someone speak while constantly switching topics can be taxing one's patience indeed. The Luxembourgish expression is composed from the words 'Hëppches', meaning 'hopscotch', and 'Haapches' meaning 'everybody'.
Wann hatt schwätzt, da kënnt et vun Hëppches op Haapches.
Sproch vun der Woch
Pull the other one! (literally: the plums too!)
Fitting answer for when you don't quite believe a person.Jo, Quetschen och!
Fitting answer for when you don't quite believe a person.
Jo, Quetschen och!
Sproch vun der Woch
He'll be presented the bill
Literally: He'll now how much a pound of cherries costs. Expression to say that someone is going to have to face the consequences of his actions sooner or later.Wann en net oppasst, da gëtt e geschwë gewuer wat d'Pond Kiischte kascht.
Literally: He'll now how much a pound of cherries costs. Expression to say that someone is going to have to face the consequences of his actions sooner or later.
Wann en net oppasst, da gëtt e geschwë gewuer wat d'Pond Kiischte kascht.
Sproch vun der Woch
Merlan cuit dans la levure de bière
One of the culinary specialties served at theSchueberfouer. Usually accompanied by chips, salad and a good glass of white Moselle wine.Geess de de Mëtteg mat eppes op d'Fouer iessen? Ech hätt Losch op e gudde Fouerfësch.
One of the culinary specialties served at theSchueberfouer. Usually accompanied by chips, salad and a good glass of white Moselle wine.
Geess de de Mëtteg mat eppes op d'Fouer iessen? Ech hätt Losch op e gudde Fouerfësch.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: when dirt becomes manure, it wants to be chauffeured
Sometimes, a person accedes to wealth and then start being arrogant. A long time ago, a large heap of manure in front of a farm was judged to be a sign of wealth. To accede to wealth, i.e. a heap of manure, from humble beginnings (dirt) and then act arrogantly was judged to be very ill-mannered.- Hues de gesinn, wéi dee sech opféiert op senger neier Plaz?- Tjo, wann den Dreck Mëscht gëtt, da wier e gär gefouert.
Sometimes, a person accedes to wealth and then start being arrogant. A long time ago, a large heap of manure in front of a farm was judged to be a sign of wealth. To accede to wealth, i.e. a heap of manure, from humble beginnings (dirt) and then act arrogantly was judged to be very ill-mannered.
- Hues de gesinn, wéi dee sech opféiert op senger neier Plaz?
- Tjo, wann den Dreck Mëscht gëtt, da wier e gär gefouert.
Sproch vun der Woch
Cosy
Now that autumn has finally arrived, it is sometimes nice to just stay at home, make yourself comfortable and spend a 'schuckeleg' evening.Maache mir eis e schuckelegen Owend?
Now that autumn has finally arrived, it is sometimes nice to just stay at home, make yourself comfortable and spend a 'schuckeleg' evening.
Maache mir eis e schuckelegen Owend?
Sproch vun der Woch
He/she isn't the sharpest tool in the shed
Literally: He/she's not the sharpest kitchen knife in the drawer. The 'Knäip' is a short kitchen knife which finds use in many areas in the kitchen.T'ass net de schäerfste Knäip am Tirang.
Literally: He/she's not the sharpest kitchen knife in the drawer. The 'Knäip' is a short kitchen knife which finds use in many areas in the kitchen.
T'ass net de schäerfste Knäip am Tirang.
Sproch vun der Woch
Figure from Luxembourgish mythology
According to legend, this water spirit lived in the Attert, a river in the west of Luxembourg. With a Harpoon, he would catch children who had come too close to the Attert or a well, and drag them into his world. Today, theKropemannsfestin Redange/Attert takes place in his honour.Géi net ze no bei d'Waasser, soss hëlt dech de Kropemann.
According to legend, this water spirit lived in the Attert, a river in the west of Luxembourg. With a Harpoon, he would catch children who had come too close to the Attert or a well, and drag them into his world. Today, theKropemannsfestin Redange/Attert takes place in his honour.
Géi net ze no bei d'Waasser, soss hëlt dech de Kropemann.
Sproch vun der Woch
Cutting your coat to suit your cloth
Literally: You have to dance with the girls who are there. A long time ago, when rural communities were more isolated, the choice of potential partners was often very limited. At the village dance, boys had to choose from among the girls who had come. Even though the expression has long lost its original meaning, it is still being used in the Luxembourgish language in situations when your options are very limited.
Literally: You have to dance with the girls who are there. A long time ago, when rural communities were more isolated, the choice of potential partners was often very limited. At the village dance, boys had to choose from among the girls who had come. Even though the expression has long lost its original meaning, it is still being used in the Luxembourgish language in situations when your options are very limited.
Sproch vun der Woch
Breakfast bale (literally: coffee table)
Coffee has left its marks in Luxembourg: the day usually starts at theKaffisdëschwith, of course, a steaming hot cup of coffee. And for the amateurs of sweets, aKaffiskichelchenmight be added, a viennoiserie. And more than Luxembourger then can be spotted dipping their viennoiserie into their coffee before savouring it.
Coffee has left its marks in Luxembourg: the day usually starts at theKaffisdëschwith, of course, a steaming hot cup of coffee. And for the amateurs of sweets, aKaffiskichelchenmight be added, a viennoiserie. And more than Luxembourger then can be spotted dipping their viennoiserie into their coffee before savouring it.
Sproch vun der Woch
Keep calm (literally: leave the church in the village)
In Luxembourg, every village has its church - telling someone to leave it there is synonymous to asking someone not to exaggerate.
In Luxembourg, every village has its church - telling someone to leave it there is synonymous to asking someone not to exaggerate.
Sproch vun der Woch
You can't change people (literally: send a dunce into the forest, he'll return a fool)
Luxembourgish expression to show your despair at a person's inability to learn and avoid mistakes.
Luxembourgish expression to show your despair at a person's inability to learn and avoid mistakes.
Sproch vun der Woch
To leave the field (literally: to clear out the leaf)
Whether someone resigns from his post or leaves a place, in Luxembourg it is said that the person 'clears out the leaf'.
Whether someone resigns from his post or leaves a place, in Luxembourg it is said that the person 'clears out the leaf'.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: Hearsay is half a lie
Don't fall prey to urban legends! When confronted with an improbable story based on rumours, clearly state your disbelief with this Luxembourgish expression.
Don't fall prey to urban legends! When confronted with an improbable story based on rumours, clearly state your disbelief with this Luxembourgish expression.
Sproch vun der Woch
Why the long face? (literally: Are your carrying rain?)
Luxembourgish expression to ask someone why he or she is looking sad.
Luxembourgish expression to ask someone why he or she is looking sad.
Sproch vun der Woch
The common flu!
Vreckechtstems from the verbvrecken(eng.: to pass the bucket) and describes a state of health in which some people do feel like they are about to die. This includes a runny nose, headache, throat-ache and aching muscles and articulations, as well as respiratory difficulties and fever. In other words: the seasonal flu.
Vreckechtstems from the verbvrecken(eng.: to pass the bucket) and describes a state of health in which some people do feel like they are about to die. This includes a runny nose, headache, throat-ache and aching muscles and articulations, as well as respiratory difficulties and fever. In other words: the seasonal flu.
Sproch vun der Woch
Boxemännchen
Sorry, but there is no counterpart in the English-speaking world that we know of - unless there is, then please let us know.TheBoxemännchenis a brioche formed like a small man which is on sale in the weeks running up toSaint Nicholas(on 6 December). Children love it with their breakfast or afternoon tea, but it is equally popular in Luxembourg's offices or among friends.
Sorry, but there is no counterpart in the English-speaking world that we know of - unless there is, then please let us know.
TheBoxemännchenis a brioche formed like a small man which is on sale in the weeks running up toSaint Nicholas(on 6 December). Children love it with their breakfast or afternoon tea, but it is equally popular in Luxembourg's offices or among friends.
Sproch vun der Woch
Grand Duke's birthday
A long time ago, the celebrations were held on the day of the Grand Duke's birthday. In 1961, the datewas fixed on 23 June, and has remained thus ever since.
A long time ago, the celebrations were held on the day of the Grand Duke's birthday. In 1961, the datewas fixed on 23 June, and has remained thus ever since.
Sproch vun der Woch
The craving (literally: the steep hunger)
It doesn't matter what the time is and the stomach is growling - it's time to see what treasures the fridge holds.
It doesn't matter what the time is and the stomach is growling - it's time to see what treasures the fridge holds.
Sproch vun der Woch
Literally: The wild one runs in the forest
This expression is not really translatable into English - it is a common phrase used by parents all over Luxembourg when their offspring use the phrase "I want" for the umpteenth time in a row. Basically, a wordplay on the Luxembourgish wordswëllen(to want) andWëllen(the wild one).
This expression is not really translatable into English - it is a common phrase used by parents all over Luxembourg when their offspring use the phrase "I want" for the umpteenth time in a row. Basically, a wordplay on the Luxembourgish wordswëllen(to want) andWëllen(the wild one).
Sproch vun der Woch
To stand up to somebody
This expression shows your appreciation that a person stands up to somebody.
This expression shows your appreciation that a person stands up to somebody.
Sproch vun der Woch
Saint Nicholas
Kleeschenis the Luxembourgish name for Saint Nicolas, a nice man who is often dressed in red, bears a bishops' hat and a crosier. He is assisted by theHouseker, who punishes children who have been naughty by handing them a twig.Saint Nicholas Day is celebrated on 6 December, and for the occasion all of Luxembourg's fundamental schools remain closed.
Kleeschenis the Luxembourgish name for Saint Nicolas, a nice man who is often dressed in red, bears a bishops' hat and a crosier. He is assisted by theHouseker, who punishes children who have been naughty by handing them a twig.Saint Nicholas Day is celebrated on 6 December, and for the occasion all of Luxembourg's fundamental schools remain closed.
Last update12.11.2020
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/dam-assets/sproch/2020/engem-de-bass-halen.mp3

================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/de/tourismus/entspannung.html
Entspannung
Entspannung
Zum letzten Mal aktualisiert am21.10.2024
Footer
Abonnieren Sie unseren Newsletter
Mit Stern gekennzeichnete Felder (*) sindPflichtfelder.
================================================================================

URL: https://luxembourg.public.lu/en/quick-fact.html
Quick Fact
Last update22.01.2020
Footer
Subscribe to our newsletter
Fields marked with an asterisk (*) aremandatory.
================================================================================